Answer Explanations

SAT Practice Test #10
Section 1: Reading Test
QUESTION 1

Choice A is the best answer. Throughout the passage, the narrator
refers to Miss Spivey’s 1938 class as “we” and “us” and describes
interactions between Miss Spivey and her students as a firsthand
observer, indicating that the narrator was a member of this 1938 class.
Therefore, the narrator of the passage can best be described as one of
Miss Spivey’s former students.
Choice B is incorrect because the narrator refers to Miss Spivey’s
predecessor, Miss Chandler, by name, not as “I” or “me,” and
therefore the narrator isn’t Miss Spivey’s predecessor. Choice C is
incorrect because the passage identifies the narrator as a member of
Miss Spivey’s 1938 class and also mentions the narrator’s mother and
brother, Ralphord. Choice D is incorrect because the narrator refers to
Miss Spivey by name and as “she” and “her,” not as “I” or “me,” and
thus can’t be Miss Spivey herself.

QUESTION 2

Choice B is the best answer. The description of the train’s arrival in
the first paragraph suggests that Threestep is a rural town: instead of
a paved platform, the tracks are lined with “burned grass.” Meanwhile,
the description of the school in the sixth paragraph implies that the
community is small: instead of individual rooms for separate grade
levels, the school’s single room contains twenty-six students spread
“across seven grade levels.” Therefore, Threestep is mainly presented
in the passage as a small rural town.
Choice A is incorrect because the narrator describes Threestep
as uncomfortably hot for its residents, not as a summer retreat for
vacationers. Choice C is incorrect because Miss Spivey refers to
prominent universities located in other cities, not ones located in
Threestep. Choice D is incorrect because in the first paragraph
Threestep is characterized as a small rural town that is experiencing
“hard times,” not as a comfortable suburb.

373

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

QUESTION 3

Choice D is the best answer. In the first paragraph, Miss Spivey
remarks that the heat in Georgia is nothing compared to the heat she
experienced in Timbuktu. Later in this paragraph the narrator states,
“I believe her remark irritated some of the people gathered to welcome
her on the burned grass alongside the tracks. When folks are sweating
through their shorts, they don’t like to hear that this is nothing
compared to someplace else.” Hence it can reasonably be inferred from
the passage that some of the people at the train station regard Miss
Spivey’s comment about the Georgia heat with resentment because
they feel that she is minimizing their discomfort.
Choice A is incorrect because Miss Spivey informs the people at the
train station that she has experienced even more extreme heat, so they
wouldn’t have assumed that she is experiencing intense heat for the
first time. Choice B is incorrect because the passage indicates that
the people at the station know Miss Spivey is coming to Threestep to
work, not that they doubt she will stay there very long. Choice C is
incorrect because the passage doesn’t indicate that the people at the
train station imagine that she is superior to them.

QUESTION 4

Choice B is the best answer. The previous question asks what can be
inferred from the passage about the reaction of the people at the train
station to Miss Spivey’s comment about the Georgia heat. The answer,
that it can be reasonably inferred from the passage that some of the
people at the train station regard Miss Spivey’s comment about the
Georgia heat with resentment because they feel that she’s minimizing
their discomfort, is best supported in the first paragraph: “I believe her
remark irritated some of the people gathered to welcome her on the
burned grass alongside the tracks. When folks are sweating through
their shorts, they don’t like to hear that this is nothing compared to
someplace else.”
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because the cited lines don’t provide
the best evidence for the answer to the previous question. Instead, they
describe Miss Spivey’s appearance (choice A), reflect on why people
viewed her arrival positively in spite of their irritation over her remark
(choice C), and outline her education (choice D).

QUESTION 5

Choice A is the best answer. In the second paragraph, Miss Spivey
describes a break she took from her formal education as a “fruitful
intermission.” She explains that she “traveled extensively in the Near
East and Africa with a friend of her grandmother’s, one Janet Miller”
during this time. Therefore, Miss Spivey most likely uses the phrase
“fruitful intermission” to indicate that she benefited from taking time
off from her studies to travel.

374

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

Choice B is incorrect because Miss Spivey’s use of the phrase “fruitful
intermission” doesn’t indicate that her travels with Janet Miller
encouraged her to start medical school. Choice C is incorrect because
Miss Spivey uses the phrase “fruitful intermission” to refer to a break
in her formal education after boarding school, not during her early
years there. Choice D is incorrect because Miss Spivey’s use of the
phrase “fruitful intermission” doesn’t indicate that this break lasted
longer than she had expected.

QUESTION 6

Choice A is the best answer. In the second paragraph, Miss Spivey
tells her class that she went to Barnard College in New York City,
which prompts Ralphord to ask her what she studied at “Barnyard
College.” In response, Miss Spivey explains that Barnard College “was
the sister school of Columbia University, of which, she expected, we
all had heard.” This interaction implies that, contrary to Miss Spivey’s
expectations, the names of prestigious East Coast schools aren’t
common knowledge among her pupils. Thus the interaction between
Miss Spivey and Ralphord serves mainly to suggest that Miss Spivey
has an exaggerated view of what information should be considered
common knowledge.
Choice B is incorrect because the interaction between Miss Spivey
and Ralphord establishes an atmosphere of misunderstanding, not
friendliness. Choice C is incorrect because Ralphord’s question
demonstrates his naivety rather than his precociousness. Choice D
is incorrect because the passage doesn’t suggest that Ralphord’s
question is an attempt to amuse Miss Spivey.

QUESTION 7

Choice D is the best answer. The third paragraph describes Miss
Spivey as having “wandered,” or walked aimlessly, into a lecture
by John Dewey. Following her interactions with the professor,
Miss Spivey was inspired to work as an educator; consequently,
she “marched,” or walked purposefully, to sign up for the Teacher’s
College. Hence, by describing Miss Spivey as having “wandered” in
the former situation and “marched” in the latter, the narrator is most
likely suggesting that Miss Spivey’s initial encounter with Dewey’s
ideas was somewhat accidental but ultimately motivated her to
decisive action.
Choices A and C are incorrect because the narrator’s description
of Miss Spivey as having “wandered” into Dewey’s class and
“marched” to sign up for the Teacher’s College suggests that her
accidental encounter with him motivated her to begin studying to
be a teacher, not that Dewey saw Miss Spivey as lacking confidence
in her ability to teach (choice A) or that she was anxious to be
in charge of her own classroom (choice C). Choice B is incorrect

375

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

because Miss Spivey didn’t express a desire to teach in the poorest,
most remote corner of America until two years after talking with
Dewey over coffee.

QUESTION 8

Choice C is the best answer. According to the third paragraph, after
two years at the Teacher’s College, Miss Spivey told a woman from
the WPA that “she wanted to bring democracy and education to the
poorest, darkest, most remote and forgotten corner of America.”
Consequently, “they sent her to Threestep, Georgia,” according to the
fourth paragraph. Thus Miss Spivey ended up in Threestep as a direct
result of talking with a woman at the WPA.
Choices A and B are incorrect because Miss Spivey ended up in
Threestep as a direct result of talking with a woman at the WPA,
not as an immediate consequence of her friendship with Janet
Miller (choice A), or her decision to attend college in New York City
(choice B). Choice D is incorrect because Miss Chandler is mentioned
as Miss Spivey’s predecessor in Threestep, but Miss Spivey’s arrival in
town doesn’t occur as a direct result of Miss Chandler’s retirement.

QUESTION 9

Choice C is the best answer. The ninth paragraph describes the
students’ reaction to Miss Spivey’s announcement that she had seen
camels on her trip to Baghdad: “We all hung there for a minute,
thinking hard, until Mavis Davis spoke up.” Mavis reminds the other
students that camels appear in a story they are familiar with. Thus,
when Miss Spivey announces that she had seen camels, the students’
reaction suggests that they are baffled.
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because when Miss Spivey
announces that she had seen camels, the students’ reaction suggests
that they are baffled, not delighted (choice A), fascinated (choice B),
or worried (choice D).

QUESTION 10

Choice B is the best answer. The previous question asks what the
students’ reaction suggests about them when Miss Spivey announces
that she had seen camels. The answer, that their reaction suggests that
they are baffled, is best supported in the ninth paragraph: “We all hung
there for a minute, thinking hard, until Mavis Davis spoke up.”
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because the cited lines don’t provide
the best evidence for the answer to the previous question. Instead,
they describe Miss Spivey’s anticipation of a delighted or amazed
response to her announcement that she had seen camels (choice A),

376

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

relay Mavis’s reference to a story familiar to the students (choice C),
and reflect on the subdued nature of Miss Spivey’s response to Mavis
(choice D).

QUESTION 11

Choice D is the best answer. Throughout the passage, the author
contends that efforts to make driving more unpleasant can curtail the
negative environmental effects of car use, such as the rapid growth
of “energy-hungry subdivisions.” According to the second paragraph,
“one of the few forces with a proven ability to slow the growth of
suburban sprawl has been the ultimately finite tolerance of commuters
for long, annoying commutes.” Consequently, according to the last
paragraph, “from an environmental perspective, inconvenient travel is
a worthy goal.” Thus the main purpose of the passage is to argue that
one way to reduce the negative environmental effects of traffic is to
make driving less agreeable.
Choice A is incorrect because the author introduces the claim that
efforts to reduce traffic actually increase traffic as a supporting point,
not as the main purpose of the passage. Choice B is incorrect because,
in the second paragraph, the author does dispute the environmental
value of making car travel more convenient, but this isn’t the main
purpose of the passage. Choice C is incorrect because the negative
environmental consequences of car-focused development and
suburban sprawl are supporting details of the passage, not its
main purpose.

QUESTION 12

Choice A is the best answer. In the first paragraph, the author states,
“Building good transit isn’t a bad idea, but it can actually backfire
if the new trains and buses merely clear space on highway lanes
for those who would prefer to drive—a group that, historically, has
included almost everyone with access to a car.” In this sentence, the
author bases his claim about the unintended consequences of building
public transit on the expectation that most people would prefer to drive
a car than take trains and buses. Hence this sentence best supports the
idea that the author assumes that, all things being equal, people would
rather drive than take mass transit.
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because the cited lines don’t
provide the best support for the idea that the author assumes that, all
things being equal, people would rather drive than take mass transit.
Instead, they argue that in order to have positive environmental
effects, new transit options have to persuade a substantial number of
people not to drive (choice B), contend that unpopular efforts to make
driving less convenient are necessary to reduce driving (choice C),
and connect increased commute times to a reduction in suburban
sprawl (choice D).

377

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

QUESTION 13

Choice A is the best answer. The first paragraph states, “That means
that a new transit system has to be backed up by something that
impels complementary reductions in car use.” In other words, new
public transportation initiatives need to be supported, or reinforced, by
policies that reduce car use. Thus “backed up,” as used in the passage,
most nearly means supported.
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because in the context of the
passage, “backed up” means supported, not copied (choice B),
substituted (choice C), or jammed (choice D).

QUESTION 14

Choice B is the best answer. In the first paragraph, the author
introduces some proposals for reducing car traffic by making driving
slower and less convenient. However, he also acknowledges that
“those ideas are not popular.” Thus, in the first paragraph, the author
concedes that his recommendations aren’t widely supported.
Choice A is incorrect because, in the first paragraph, the author doesn’t
indicate that his recommendations are costly to implement. Choice C
is incorrect because the author concedes that his recommendations
are unpopular with the general public, not strongly opposed by
experts. Choice D is incorrect because the author suggests that his
recommendations are environmentally beneficial in the long term, not
environmentally harmful in the short term.

QUESTION 15

Choice C is the best answer. In the second paragraph, the author
argues that “if, in a misguided effort to do something of environmental
value, municipalities take steps that make long-distance car
commuting faster or more convenient . . . we actually make the sprawl
problem worse.” That is, measures that make driving more convenient
actually harm the environment because they encourage more people to
live in suburban developments, which represents wasteful expansion
in his view. Therefore, based on the passage, the author would most
likely characterize many attempts to improve traffic as well intentioned
but ultimately leading to environmental harm.
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because the author doesn’t
characterize attempts to improve traffic as doomed to fail due to drivers’
reluctance to change their behavior (choice A), as overestimating
drivers’ tolerance of long commutes (choice B), or as viable only if they
make driving more economical and productive (choice D).

378

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

QUESTION 16

Choice C is the best answer. The previous question asks how the
author would most likely characterize many attempts to improve
traffic. The answer, that the author would most likely characterize
such attempts as well intentioned but ultimately leading to
environmental harm, is best supported in the second paragraph:
“If, in a misguided effort to do something of environmental value,
municipalities take steps that make long-distance car commuting faster
or more convenient—by adding lanes, building bypasses, employing
traffic-control measures that make it possible for existing roads to
accommodate more cars with fewer delays, replacing tollbooths with
radio-based systems that don’t require drivers even to slow down—we
actually make the sprawl problem worse.”
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because the cited lines don’t provide
the best evidence for the answer to the previous question. Instead,
they assert that public transit improvements must be supported by
measures to reduce car use (choice A), indicate that tolerance for long
commutes has grown recently, but has a natural limit (choice B), and
elaborate on why improvements in public transport can fail to decrease
road use (choice D).

QUESTION 17

Choice D is the best answer. The second paragraph discusses how
efforts to make commuting more convenient can have the unintended
consequence of encouraging people to live farther away from their
jobs: “If you cut commuting time by 10 percent, people who now drive
fifty miles each way to work can justify moving five miles farther out,
because their travel time won’t change.” Therefore, according to
the passage, reducing commuting time for drivers can have the
effect of making drivers more willing to live farther from their places
of employment.
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because the passage doesn’t suggest
that reducing commuting time can make drivers more productive
employees (choice A), can cause mass transit to be extended farther
into suburban areas (choice B), or can result in less government
funding for mass transit (choice C).

QUESTION 18

Choice C is the best answer. The last paragraph asserts, “No one ever
promotes a transit scheme by arguing that it would make traveling less
convenient.” In other words, nobody advocates, or pushes for, changes
to the transportation system by arguing that they would make traveling
less convenient. Thus “promotes,” as used in the passage, most nearly
means advocates.

379

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because in the context of the
passage, “promotes” means advocates, not upgrades (choice A), serves
(choice B), or develops (choice D).

QUESTION 19

Choice B is the best answer. Figure 1 presents data related to the
effect of route capacity reduction on selected regions. In the row
pertaining to Southampton city center, the number 5,316 appears
under the heading “Vehicles per day on altered road” in the column
that specifies “Before alteration.” Thus, according to figure 1,
the number of vehicles that traveled on the altered road through
Southampton city center per day before the route was altered is 5,316.
Choice A is incorrect because 3,081 is the number of vehicles per day
that traveled on the Southampton city center road after it was altered,
not before. Choice C is incorrect because 24,101 is the number of
vehicles per day that traveled on roads surrounding the Southampton
city center road after it was altered. Choice D is incorrect because
26,522 is the number of vehicles that traveled on roads surrounding the
Southampton city center road before it was altered.

QUESTION 20

Choice B is the best answer. In the first paragraph, the author of the
passage argues that “to have environmental value . . . a new transit
system has to be backed up by something that impels complementary
reductions in car use—say, the physical elimination of traffic lanes.”
According to figure 1, reducing route capacity resulted in a net
reduction in regional traffic in all five areas studied. Therefore, the data
in figure 1 support the author’s argument because the data show that
reducing road capacity can lead to a net reduction in traffic.
Choice A is incorrect. Figure 1 data support the author’s argument that
route capacity reduction results in a reduction of car use, but the figure
doesn’t provide data relating to the “induced traffic” phenomenon.
Choices C and D are incorrect because figure 1 data support, not
weaken, the author’s argument that route capacity reduction such as
elimination of traffic lanes results in reduction of traffic.

QUESTION 21

Choice D is the best answer. Figure 2 presents data related to an
opinion poll of transportation engineers. According to the y-axis
label, the engineers were asked whether a significant road space
reallocation could result in people changing various aspects of their
driving. The graph shows four different answer possibilities: “yes,”
“yes (in exceptional circumstances),” “no,” and “don’t know.” The
question asks for the aspect of driver behavior that the engineers
surveyed thought was least likely to change in the event of a
reallocation of road space according to figure 2: when they travel,

380

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

their means of traveling, how often they make a journey, or their
driving style. Of these four choices, “their driving style,” received the
smallest percentage of “yes” and “yes (in exceptional circumstances)”
responses and the largest percentage of “no” responses. Hence, based
on figure 2, the engineers surveyed were most skeptical of the idea
that, in the event of a reallocation of road space, drivers would change
their driving style.
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because, according to figure 2,
when the engineers were asked whether they thought that drivers
would change when they travel (choice A), their means of traveling
(choice B), or how often they make a journey (choice C) in the event
of a significant road space reallocation, they gave more “yes” or “yes
(in exceptional circumstances)” answers, and fewer “no” answers
than they gave in response to the question of whether they thought
drivers would change their driving style. Thus the engineers were less
skeptical of these potential changes than they were of the idea that
drivers would change their driving style in the event of a significant
road space reallocation.

QUESTION 22

Choice D is the best answer. The first paragraph asserts that textbook
authors in the early 1990s believed that “sensations of pressure and
vibration . . . travel only along myelinated, fast-signaling nerve fibers.”
Thus, based on the passage, textbook authors in the early 1990s would
most likely have expected that the ability to perceive vibrations would
be impaired as a result of blocking fast fibers.
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because the passage indicates that
textbook authors in the early 1990s believed blocking fast nerve fibers
would impair sensations of vibration, not that blocking would increase
the firing rate of other fibers (choice A), cause gentle stimuli to be
perceived as painful (choice B), or make the body compensate by using
slow fibers to sense pressure (choice C).

QUESTION 23

Choice B is the best answer. The previous question asks what
condition textbook authors in the early 1990s would most likely have
expected to result from blocking fast fibers. The answer, that they
would most likely have expected blocking fast fibers to result in an
impairment of the ability to perceive vibrations, is best supported in
the first paragraph, which refers to the views of textbook authors in
the early 1990s: “Sensations of pressure and vibration were believed
to travel only along myelinated, fast-signaling nerve fibers, which also
give information about location.”
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because the cited lines don’t
provide the best evidence for the answer to the previous question.
Instead, they assert that textbook authors in the early 1990s believed

381

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

slow-conducting nerves responded only to pain and temperature
stimuli (choice A), noted that blocking slow fibers only seemed to
reduce sensitivity to warmth or small painful shocks (choice C), and
knew that fast-conducting fibers responded to touch at a signal rate of
35 to 75 m/s (choice D).

QUESTION 24

Choice A is the best answer. The second paragraph states, “Håkan
Olausson and his Gothenburg University colleagues Åke Vallbo and
Johan Wessberg wondered if slow fibers responsive to gentle pressure
might be active in humans as well as in other mammals.” In other
words, the researchers wondered if these nerves were present, or
existent, in humans and other mammals. Therefore, in the context of
the passage, the word “active” most nearly means present.
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because in the context of the
passage, “active” most nearly means present, not attentive (choice B),
movable (choice C), or restless (choice D).

QUESTION 25

Choice C is the best answer. The second paragraph states, “Using a
technique called microneurography, in which a fine filament is inserted
into a single nerve to capture its electrical impulses, the scientists were
able to measure how quickly—or slowly—the nerves fired.” In other
words, the researchers used the technique known as microneurography
to record, or register, the electrical signals sent by nerve fibers.
Therefore, in the context of the passage, the word “capture” most
nearly means record.
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because in the context of the
passage, “capture” most nearly means record, not occupy (choice A),
seize (choice B), or influence (choice D).

QUESTION 26

Choice C is the best answer. According to the passage, different types
of nerve fibers carry signals at different speeds, either fast or slow.
The second paragraph outlines a study led by Håkan Olausson in 1993
that measured the response time of nerves when exposed to gentle
pressure. Olausson and his team found that “soft stroking prompted
two different signals” in test subjects’ nerve fibers, “one immediate
and one delayed.” Therefore, the conclusion that is best supported by
the findings of Olausson’s 1993 experiment is that gentle pressure is
sensed not only by fast fibers but also by slow fibers.
Choices A and D are incorrect because according to the passage,
Olausson’s 1993 study didn’t compare how signal speed was affected
by stimulation in different bodily areas (choice A) or by different

382

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

amounts of pressure applied to the nerve (choice D). Choice B is
incorrect because the passage notes that only human hairy skin
contains slow nerve fibers, not that hair causes signal speeds to slow.

QUESTION 27

Choice B is the best answer. The previous question asks which
conclusion is best supported by the findings of Olausson’s 1993
experiment. The answer, that Olausson’s 1993 experiment best
supports the conclusion that gentle pressure is sensed not only by
fast fibers but also by slow fibers, is best supported in the second
paragraph: Olausson’s team “showed that soft stroking prompted two
different signals, one immediate and one delayed.”
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because the cited lines don’t provide
the best evidence for the answer to the previous question. Instead,
they describe a technique used by Olausson’s team (choice A), quantify
the amount of time between the fast signals and the slow signals
observed by Olausson’s team (choice C), and introduce a further study
conducted by Olausson’s team in 1999 (choice D).

QUESTION 28

Choice D is the best answer. This sentence from the fourth paragraph
outlines a quandary that arose from the 1999 study conducted by
Olausson’s team: “But why exactly humans might have such fibers,
which respond only to a narrow range of rather subtle stimuli, was
initially mystifying.” The passage presents this line of inquiry as a
justification for the team’s subsequent research on CT fibers. Thus
this sentence serves mainly to show a problem from the perspective of
Olausson’s team.
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect. The cited lines serve mainly
to show a problem from the perspective of Olausson’s team, not
to identify factors Olausson had previously failed to consider
(choice A), propose a solution to a dilemma encountered by Olausson
(choice B), or anticipate a potential criticism of Olausson by the
reader (choice C).

QUESTION 29

Choice A is the best answer. According to the fifth paragraph,
Olausson set out to discover, in his team’s 1999 research, whether a CT
nerve “can distinguish where the brush touches the arm, and whether
it can discern the difference between a goat-hair brush and a feather.
Most importantly, could that same fiber convey a pleasant sensation?”
Therefore, it can reasonably be inferred that one of the intended
goals of the 1999 experiment was to determine the precise nature of
sensations that CT fibers can convey.

383

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because in their 1999 research,
Olausson’s team didn’t seek to determine the relationship between
human body hair and CT fiber function (choice B), the role played
by CT fibers in the perception of pain (choice C), or the effects of
microneurography on CT fiber signaling (choice D).

QUESTION 30

Choice D is the best answer. In the 1999 study, Olausson’s team
conducted experiments on a patient known as G.L. The researchers
wanted to learn more about what type of sensations slow-conducting
CT nerve fibers transmit, and G.L. was of special interest to them,
according to the sixth paragraph: “More than 2 decades earlier . . . she
had lost responsiveness to pressure, and a nerve biopsy confirmed that
G.L.’s quick-conducting fibers were gone. . . . But she could still sense
warmth, suggesting that her slow-conducting unmyelinated fibers
were intact.” The fact that G.L.’s slow-conducting fibers were still
intact while her other nerves were unresponsive allowed Olausson’s
team to study her slow-conducting CT fibers in isolation. Thus the
main purpose of the sixth paragraph is to indicate why G.L.’s medical
condition was of value to Olausson’s experiment.
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because the sixth paragraph doesn’t
indicate that Olausson’s team set out to relieve any of the neurological
conditions that G.L. exhibited (choice A), compare G.L.’s nerve
function with that of other adults (choice B), or detail any procedures
that G.L. had experienced during previous experiments (choice C).

QUESTION 31

Choice A is the best answer. According to the last paragraph,
“in normal subjects, both the somatosensory and insular cortices
were activated [by gentle brushing], but only the insular cortex
[which processes emotion] was active when researchers brushed
G.L.’s arm.” Therefore, according to the passage, G.L. differed from
Olausson’s other test subjects in terms of the number of cortices
activated in the brain during gentle brushing.
Choice B is incorrect because the passage doesn’t address the physical
dimensions of the somatosensory cortex in G.L. or other test subjects.
Choice C is incorrect because G.L. differed from other test subjects in
terms of the number of cortices activated in the brain during gentle
brushing, not in terms of the intensity of nerve signals required
to activate the insular cortex. Choice D is incorrect because MRI
scanning is discussed in the passage as a method used to locate brain
activity, not as a focus of study in Olausson’s research.

384

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

QUESTION 32

Choice B is the best answer. According to the last paragraph,
Olausson’s 1999 research, in which CT fibers were stimulated,
“solidified the notion that CT fibers convey a more emotional quality of
touch.” Hence humans experience an emotional aspect of touch when
CT fibers are exposed to a stimulus, according to the passage.
Choice A is incorrect because the passage doesn’t indicate that
humans experience an emotional aspect of touch when brain cortices
are shielded from nerve signals. Choice C is incorrect because the
suppression of G.L.’s pain-sensing fibers did help Olausson study
CT fibers in isolation and determine that they transmit an emotional
aspect of touch, but the passage doesn’t suggest that suppressing
these fibers is what allows humans to experience this emotional aspect
of touch. Choice D is incorrect because the passage indicates that
CT fibers transmit an emotional aspect of touch rather than conscious
aspects of sensation, not that humans must ignore the conscious
aspects of sensation in order to experience the emotional aspects
of touch.

QUESTION 33

Choice C is the best answer. In the first paragraph of Passage 1,
Beveridge portrays America as “a noble land that God has given us;
a land that can feed and clothe the world; a land whose coast lines
would enclose half the countries of Europe.” Thus, in Passage 1,
Beveridge asserts that the resources and immensity of the United
States constitute a divine gift to the American people.
Choice A is incorrect because Beveridge envisions Americans
occupying foreign lands, not being subject to foreign invasion;
moreover, he asserts that the resources and immensity of the United
States constitute a divine gift, not a safeguard against invasion.
Choice B is incorrect because Beveridge asserts that American society
constitutes an improvement on English society, not that the resources
and immensity of the United States replicate conditions in Europe.
Choice D is incorrect because Beveridge doesn’t assert that the
resources and immensity of the United States constitute a source of
envy for people in other countries.

QUESTION 34

Choice B is the best answer. In the second paragraph of Passage 1,
Beveridge commands his audience several times to think of a future
in which American laws and customs have been extended to foreign
countries, leading American citizens to move to those places.
According to Beveridge, this will provide Hawaii and Puerto Rico
with “justice and safety,” the Philippines with “order and equity,” and
Cuba with a “civilization of energy and industry.” Thus, in the second
paragraph of Passage 1, the commands given by Beveridge mainly
serve to anticipate the benefits of a proposed policy.
385

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because Beveridge’s commands
serve to anticipate the benefits of a proposed foreign policy, not to
remind the audience of its civic responsibilities (choice A), emphasize
the urgency of a national problem (choice C), or refute an argument
advanced by opponents (choice D).

QUESTION 35

Choice B is the best answer. The fourth paragraph of Passage 2
asserts that “a truth once spoken can never be recalled. It goes on and
on, and no one can set a limit to its ever-widening influence.” In other
words, when a true idea has been introduced to the world, it can never
be retracted, or taken back. Therefore, in the context of the passage,
the word “recalled” most nearly means retracted.
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because in the context of the
passage, “recalled” most nearly means retracted, not repeated
(choice A), rejected (choice C), or remembered (choice D).

QUESTION 36

Choice D is the best answer. In the fourth paragraph of Passage 2,
Bryan argues that the principle of self-rule set forth in the Declaration
of Independence is, in fact, a value that all people instinctively aspire
to. Indeed, for Bryan, “[God] never made a race of people so low in
the scale of civilization or intelligence that it would welcome a foreign
master.” Therefore, it can reasonably be inferred from Passage 2
that Bryan considers the preference for national sovereignty over
foreign rule to be a manifestation of an innate drive in humans
toward self-rule.
Choices A and C are incorrect because it can reasonably be inferred
that Bryan considers the preference for national sovereignty
over foreign rule to be a manifestation of a universal drive in
humans that’s independent of circumstances, not a reaction to the
excesses of imperial governments in the modern era (choice A) or
a testament to the effects of the foreign policy of the United States
(choice C). Choice B is incorrect because Bryan indicates that a
preference for self-rule is universal, not that belief in human equality
is widespread.

QUESTION 37

Choice C is the best answer. The previous question asks what can
reasonably be inferred from Passage 2 about Bryan’s views on the
preference for national sovereignty over foreign rule. The answer,
that Bryan considers the preference to be a manifestation of an innate
drive in humans toward self-rule, is best supported in the fourth
paragraph of Passage 2: “[God] never made a race of people so low
in the scale of civilization or intelligence that it would welcome a
foreign master.”

386

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because the cited lines don’t provide
the best evidence for the answer to the previous question. Instead,
they indicate that explicitly promoting imperialism would run counter
to the words of American founding father Patrick Henry (choice A),
assert that once a truth is uttered, its influence will continually grow
(choice B), and introduce the notion that, in Bryan’s view, an imperial
project in the Philippines would hurt not only the people of that nation
but also the people of the United States (choice D).

QUESTION 38

Choice A is the best answer. The last paragraph of Passage 2 states,
“Those who would have this Nation enter upon a career of empire
must consider, not only the effect of imperialism on the Filipinos, but
they must also calculate its effects upon our own nation.” In other
words, proponents of imperial conquest must evaluate, or assess,
the consequences of this policy for the United States. Therefore,
in the context of the passage, the word “calculate” most nearly
means evaluate.
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because in the context of the
passage, “calculate” most nearly means evaluate, not design
(choice B), assume (choice C), or multiply (choice D).

QUESTION 39

Choice A is the best answer. In the first paragraph of Passage 1,
Beveridge references the founding and history of the United States as
“a glorious history” that was bestowed upon God’s “chosen people,”
a history heroic with faith in its mission and future, and “statesmen,
who flung the boundaries of the Republic out into unexplored lands.”
Similarly, in the second paragraph of Passage 2, Bryan declares, “Our
whole history has been an encouragement . . . to all who are denied a
voice in their own government.” Bryan goes on to extol the virtues of
several figures who were instrumental in the founding of the United
States, including Thomas Jefferson and George Washington. Hence,
in developing their respective arguments, Beveridge (Passage 1)
and Bryan (Passage 2) both express admiration for the founding and
history of the United States.
Choice B is incorrect because neither Bryan, in Passage 1, nor
Beveridge, in Passage 2, expresses admiration for the vibrancy and
diversity of American culture. Choice C is incorrect because Bryan
expresses admiration for the worldwide history of struggles for
independence, but Beveridge doesn’t. Choice D is incorrect because
Beveridge expresses admiration for the idealism that permeates many
aspects of American society, but Bryan doesn’t.

387

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

QUESTION 40

Choice B is the best answer. In the first paragraph of Passage 1,
Beveridge argues that Americans are “imperial by virtue of their
power” and are therefore justified in being “the propagandists . . . of
liberty.” In the second paragraph, he extols the benefits that will arise
from American administration of various island nations. Meanwhile, in
the last sentence of Passage 2, Bryan cautions, “We cannot repudiate
the principle of self-government in the Philippines without weakening
that principle here”; in other words, imperial expansion by the United
States would erode a key American value. Therefore, the difference
between how the speakers view liberty as it is realized in the United
States is that Beveridge considers it so exemplary as to justify the
conquest of other regions, whereas Bryan warns that its exemplary
quality would be undermined by imperial expansion.
Choice A is incorrect because Beveridge doesn’t present the concept
of liberty as it’s realized in the United States as the direct inheritance
of European colonization. Choice C is incorrect because Beveridge
doesn’t argue that the concept of liberty as it’s realized in the United
States arose organically as the country matured; instead, both
Beveridge and Bryan emphasize the divinely inspired, intrinsic nature
of the American concept of liberty. Choice D is incorrect because
Bryan views the concept of liberty as it’s realized in the United States
as encompassing a desire for self-rule and argues that this desire is
universal and not unique to the United States.

QUESTION 41

Choice D is the best answer. In Passage 1, Beveridge advocates for
American administration of island nations, such as the Philippines.
However, in the first paragraph of Passage 2, Bryan warns, “If it is
right for the United States to hold the Philippine Islands permanently
and imitate European empires in the government of colonies, the
Republican party . . . must expect the subject races to protest against
such a policy and to resist to the extent of their ability.” Thus it can
most reasonably be inferred from Passage 2 that Bryan would criticize
the vision of American governance of island territories that Beveridge
presents in Passage 1 for being naive, since the islanders would object
to being governed by Americans.
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because, in Passage 2, Bryan
doesn’t imply that Beveridge’s vision of American governance of
island territories is unrealistic due to most Americans’ unwillingness
to relocate to distant islands (choice A), deceptive due to the fact
that economic domination would be the true goal of the American
government (choice B), or impractical due to the islanders’ insistence
upon an equal distribution of resources (choice C).

388

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

QUESTION 42

Choice A is the best answer. The previous question asks what
criticism Bryan would most likely make of Beveridge’s vision of
American governance of island territories. The answer, that Bryan
would criticize this vision for being naive, since islanders would
object to being governed by Americans, is best supported by the first
paragraph of Passage 2: “If it is right for the United States to hold
the Philippine Islands permanently and imitate European empires in
the government of colonies, the Republican party ought to state its
position and defend it, but it must expect the subject races to protest
against such a policy and to resist to the extent of their ability.”
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because the cited lines don’t provide
the best evidence for the answer to the previous question. Instead, they
assert that the people of the Philippines don’t need encouragement
from Americans to resist imperialism (choice B), state that American
history encourages resistance to imperialism by all people, including
the people of the Philippines (choice C), and note the enduring
resonance of Patrick Henry’s famous quote about liberty (choice D).

QUESTION 43

Choice A is the best answer. The passage summarizes research on
the relationship between plowing and weed growth. According to the
fourth paragraph, the research of Karl Hartmann suggests that plowing
fields during the day leads to weed growth because exposure to even
small amounts of light can “induce seed germination,” or cause seeds
to sprout. Thus, according to the passage, exposure to light allows
seeds to begin to develop.
Choices B and D are incorrect because the passage indicates that
small amounts of light cause seeds to sprout, but it doesn’t explicitly
assert that light exposure allows seeds to absorb necessary nutrients
(choice B) and doesn’t discuss whether light exposure helps seeds
achieve maximum growth (choice D). Choice C is incorrect because the
passage doesn’t indicate that light exposure can help seeds withstand
extreme temperatures.

QUESTION 44

Choice B is the best answer. In the second paragraph of the passage,
the following question is posed: “Do the blades of a plow, which can
reach more than a foot beneath the soil surface, bring some of these
buried seeds to the surface where their germination is induced by
exposure to sunlight?” The passage goes on to describe research
conducted both in the laboratory and in the field that sought to
answer this question. Hence the question in the second paragraph
primarily serves to introduce the specific research topic addressed in
the passage.

389

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

Choice A is incorrect because the question in the second paragraph
doesn’t primarily serve to emphasize the provisional nature of the
findings discussed in the passage. Sauer and Struik’s 1960s lab
experiments, described in the third paragraph, produced findings
that could be characterized as provisional; however, Karl Hartmann’s
research described in the fourth paragraph clearly demonstrated
that plowing at night can be an effective way to reduce weed growth.
Choice C is incorrect because the impact of the studies analyzed in
the passage has been real and practical, not hypothetical. Choice D
is incorrect because the question in the second paragraph doesn’t
indicate that there is any significant disagreement about the methods
explored in the passage.

QUESTION 45

Choice D is the best answer. The last sentence of the second
paragraph asks, “Do the blades of a plow . . . bring some of these
buried seeds to the surface where their germination is induced by
exposure to sunlight?” In other words, does some farm equipment
bring buried seeds to the surface where their sprouting is stimulated,
or activated, by exposure to sunlight? Therefore, in the context of the
passage, the word “induced” most nearly means stimulated.
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because in the context of the
passage, “induced” most nearly means stimulated, not lured
(choice A), established (choice B), or convinced (choice C).

QUESTION 46

Choice C is the best answer. The question asks which selection
from the passage best supports the idea that seeds present in fields
plowed at night are exposed to some amount of light. The fourth
paragraph asserts that plowing at night can reduce the germination
of weed seeds. The paragraph concludes that “although even under
these conditions hundreds of millions of photons strike each square
millimeter of ground each second, this illumination is below the
threshold needed to stimulate the germination of most seeds.” Thus
this sentence best supports the idea that seeds present in fields plowed
at night are exposed to some amount of light.
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because the cited lines don’t provide
the best support for the idea that seeds present in fields plowed
at night are exposed to some amount of light. Instead, they relay
Hartmann’s initial reasoning about seed exposure to light in fields
plowed during the day (choice A), affirm that even minute durations
of sunlight exposure can induce seed germination (choice B), and
explain Hartmann’s initial skepticism regarding his own idea about the
effectiveness of nighttime plowing as a weed deterrent (choice D).

390

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

QUESTION 47

Choice A is the best answer. The sixth paragraph describes an
experiment conducted by Karl Hartmann with the help of farmer
Karl Seydel. Seydel plowed one strip of land during the day and the
other at night to see what effect this had on weed growth. However,
“no crops were planted in these pilot experiments, to avoid possible
competition with the emerging weeds.” Thus the passage suggests
that if Seydel had planted wheat or corn on the two agricultural strips
in Hartmann’s experiment, the percentage of the surface of each strip
covered with weeds would likely have been lower than the percentage
that Hartmann found.
Choice B is incorrect. If Seydel had planted wheat or corn crops on
the two agricultural strips, the percentage of weeds wouldn’t have
been higher than the percentage predicted because competition with
the crops would have prevented some weed growth. Choice C is
incorrect because a reduction in weed growth would have been easily
observable, not nearly impossible for Hartmann to determine. Choice D
is incorrect. Hartmann’s original projection was that plowing at night
wouldn't provide more effective weed control. Therefore, the dramatic
drop in the percentage of weeds covering the strip plowed at night
wouldn’t have been comparable with Hartmann’s original projection,
regardless of whether crops were planted.

QUESTION 48

Choice B is the best answer. The previous question asks what the
passage suggests about the percentage of surface that would have
been covered with weeds if Seydel had planted wheat or corn on the
two agricultural strips in Hartmann’s experiment. The answer, that
the percentage of surface with weeds would have been lower than the
percentage Hartmann found, is best supported in the sixth paragraph:
“No crops were planted in these pilot experiments, to avoid possible
competition with the emerging weeds.”
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because the cited lines don’t provide
the best evidence for the answer to the previous question. Instead,
they describe the conditions of Hartmann’s experiment (choice A),
characterize the results of the experiment as dramatic (choice C), and
report the results of the experiment (choice D).

QUESTION 49

Choice C is the best answer. The sixth paragraph states, in reference
to Hartmann’s experiment, “The results were dramatic. More than
80 percent of the surface of the field plowed in daylight was covered by
weeds, whereas only about 2 percent of the field plowed at night was
covered by weeds.” In other words, the outcome of the experiment was
impressive, or striking. Therefore, in the context of the passage, the
word “dramatic” most nearly means impressive.

391

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because, in the context of the
passage, “dramatic” most nearly means impressive, not theatrical
(choice A), sudden (choice B), or emotional (choice D).

QUESTION 50

Choice A is the best answer. According to the table, 0 weed seedlings
emerged in sample A when the soil was disturbed in darkness. This is
the lowest number of seedlings recorded among all the samples in the
table when the soil was disturbed in darkness.
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because sample B (choice B),
sample C (choice C), and sample D (choice D) had 1, 2, and 3 seedlings
emerge, respectively, when the soil was disturbed in darkness. These
totals are all greater than 0, the number of seedlings that emerged from
sample A when the soil was disturbed in darkness.

QUESTION 51

Choice C is the best answer. According to the table, 14 weed seedlings
emerged in sample I when the soil was disturbed in light. This is the
highest number of seedlings recorded among all the samples in the
table when the soil was disturbed in light.
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because sample G (choice A),
sample H (choice B), and sample J (choice D) had 0, 2, and 5 seedlings
emerge, respectively, when the soil was disturbed in light. This is less
than the 14 seedlings that emerged from sample I when the soil was
disturbed in light.

QUESTION 52

Choice D is the best answer. The data presented in the table show
that in nine of the ten soil samples studied, fewer weeds grew in the
soil when it was disturbed in darkness than when it was disturbed
in light. The fourth paragraph relays Karl Hartmann’s hypothesis
based on Sauer and Struik’s studies of weed growth in the 1960s:
“Thus the germination of weed seeds would be minimized if farmers
simply plowed their fields during the night, when the photon fluence
rate [the rate at which photons hit the surface] is below 1015 photons
per square meter per second.” Therefore, the data presented in the
table most directly support the claim made in the fourth paragraph of
the passage.
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because the cited lines aren’t directly
supported by the data presented in the table. While the findings in the
table report on weed growth in soil stirred up during the day and night,
these lines discuss the prehistoric use of plowing to control weeds
(choice A), the number of weed seeds buried beneath the soil surface
(choice B), and the depth at which seeds are buried that prevents them
from germinating (choice C).

392

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

Section 2: writing and language Test
QUESTION 1

Choice A is the best answer. The conjunction “and” appropriately
separates the last two nouns in the series, “radio” and “other media.”
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because “and with,” “and also,”
and “and competing with” disrupt the parallel structure of the series
of three nouns (“television,” “radio,” “[other] media”) introduced by
“competing with.”

QUESTION 2

Choice D is the best answer. The topic of the passage is the creation
of The Cat in the Hat as a means of getting children more interested
in learning to read. Hersey’s suggestion that one way of making
children’s books more interesting was to use “drawings like those of
the wonderfully imaginative geniuses among children’s illustrators”
best supports the topic of the passage.
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because they don’t support the
topic of the passage. A sense of wholeness and accomplishment, the
value of failure, and a difference between journalism and fiction don’t
support the idea of making children’s literature more interesting.

QUESTION 3

Choice A is the best answer. The comma after “Spaulding” is paired
correctly with the comma after “Mifflin” to set off grammatically
nonessential information.
Choice B is incorrect because a comma is needed after “Spaulding”
to set off the nonessential phrase that ends with “Mifflin.” Choice C
is incorrect because placing a comma after “Spaulding” and after
“director” wrongly indicates that “the director” could be deleted
without changing the meaning of the sentence. Choice D is incorrect
because a dash can’t be paired with a comma to set off grammatically
nonessential information.

QUESTION 4

Choice A is the best answer. This choice most effectively combines
the sentences at the underlined portion because it’s concise and
correctly indicates that Spaulding saw a need for appealing books
for beginning readers at the same time that he thought he knew who
should write one.
Choice B is incorrect because “namely” indicates that a more
specific restatement of an earlier point or an example will follow.
In this case, what follows the idea that Spaulding saw a need for
appealing books is his thought about who should write one. Choice C
is incorrect because the repetition of Spaulding’s name is unnecessary.

393

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

Choice D is incorrect because the adverb “meanwhile” is redundant;
the conjunction “and” is sufficient to indicate that Spaulding had
two thoughts simultaneously.

QUESTION 5

Choice D is the best answer. This choice, which indicates that
Geisel published nine children’s books and received three nominations
for the prestigious Caldecott Medal, supports the information that
follows in the sentence about Geisel being an experienced writer
and illustrator.
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect. Geisel’s long relationship with
Spaulding, Geisel’s reputation for perfectionism and for setting high
standards, and his interest in politics don’t support the idea that Geisel
was an experienced writer and illustrator.

QUESTION 6

Choice A is the best answer; “however” correctly indicates that even
though Geisel was an experienced writer and illustrator, the new
project presented him with an obstacle.
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because none of these transitional
words or phrases shows the true relationship between the challenging
nature of the new project and Geisel’s experience. “For example,”
“furthermore,” and “at any rate” indicate that what follows is an
instance of, additional to, or unrelated to what was stated in the
previous sentence.

QUESTION 7

Choice C is the best answer. The introductory phrase “on the verge of
giving up” doesn’t have its own subject. Instead, the subject appears
at the beginning of the sentence’s main clause and makes clear what
is being described in the introductory phrase. “Geisel” is the logical
subject of the sentence because he can be described as being “on the
verge of giving up.”
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because “Geisel’s story,” “an image,”
and “the story” can’t be described as being “on the verge of giving up.”

QUESTION 8

Choice D is the best answer. This choice concisely indicates that it
took Geisel nine months to complete The Cat in the Hat.
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because they’re repetitive.
“Duration” and “long” (choice A), “thirty-six weeks” (choice B), and
“length” (choice C) unnecessarily repeat the idea that nine months
had passed.

394

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

QUESTION 9

Choice D is the best answer. The underlined portion should be deleted
because it isn’t necessary. Since “were entertained” appears earlier in
the sentence, the past participle “captivated” is sufficient without the
repetition of “were.”
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because “is captivated,” “was
captivated,” and “has been captivated” are singular verbs that don’t
agree in number with the plural subject “children.”

QUESTION 10

Choice C is the best answer. The comma after “followed” is used
correctly to separate the dependent phrase “in the years that followed”
from the independent clause that begins with “many.”
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because a period, a semicolon, or a
dash can’t be used in this way to separate an introductory dependent
phrase from an independent clause.

QUESTION 11

Choice C is the best answer. This choice indicates that The Cat in the
Hat’s success is attributable to its enduring ability to delight children
and engage them in learning how to read. This idea restates the main
themes of the passage, which are the need to make books appealing
to beginning readers and the importance of engaging those readers
through interesting plots and illustrations.
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect. The idea that the best proof of
The Cat in the Hat’s success is its limited vocabulary and appealing
word choices, its impressive worldwide sales, or its important role in
the history of twentieth-century illustration doesn’t restate the main
themes of the passage.

QUESTION 12

Choice D is the best answer. The gerund “picking up” is parallel
in structure to the other gerunds in the sentence, “helping”
and “working.”
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because they don’t maintain
parallelism in the sentence. “When they pick up litter,” “to pick up
litter,” and “litter collection” don’t contain gerunds.

QUESTION 13

Choice A is the best answer. The transitional phrase “by its very
definition” points to the criticism in the previous paragraph that when
volunteering is compulsory, it’s no longer volunteerism.

395

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because the reference to general
work, students, or communities in need doesn’t highlight the criticism
of compulsory volunteering mentioned in the previous paragraph.

QUESTION 14

Choice D is the best answer. The plural noun “officials” correctly
refers to the people who require students to give up time for nonprofit
activities. Additionally, the plural possessive noun “students’”
indicates that the choice to give up personal time is supposed to
belong to multiple students.
Choice A is incorrect because “officials’” is a plural possessive noun,
but nothing belongs to the officials in this sentence. Choice B is
incorrect because “students” is a plural noun, but the plural possessive
noun “students’” is needed to indicate that the choice is supposed
to belong to students. Choice C is incorrect because “student’s” is a
singular possessive noun, but the plural possessive noun “students’”
is needed to show that the choice is supposed to belong to
multiple students.

QUESTION 15

Choice C is the best answer. This choice is clear and concise and
doesn’t repeat the idea of proponents that begins the sentence.
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because they’re repetitive. Since
proponents are people who support a cause, describing proponents of
compulsory volunteering as being in favor of it, advocating it, or being
advocates creates redundancy.

QUESTION 16

Choice B is the best answer. This choice, a closer connection
with their community, is a benefit of volunteering and provides a
supporting example that is most similar to the other examples of
benefits offered in the sentence: increased self-esteem and better
relationship-building skills.
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because they don’t provide
supporting examples that are similar to the examples in the sentence.
Increasingly busy schedules, less time spent engaging in social
activities, and little increase in academic achievement aren’t benefits
of volunteering.

QUESTION 17

Choice B is the best answer. The infinitive “[to] affect” parallels
the earlier infinitive “[to] volunteer” (“are more likely to volunteer,”
“[are more likely to] affect”). Moreover, “affect,” meaning “to influence,”
is used correctly to indicate that students who do community service
positively influence society.

396

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

Choices A and C are incorrect because the verb “effect” generally
means “to bring about” and the noun “effect” means “result,” neither
of which makes sense in the sentence. Choice D is incorrect because
the singular verb “affects” doesn’t work here, where the infinitive
“affect” is required.

QUESTION 18

Choice A is the best answer; “mandatory” is the most precise word to
use when describing the volunteering that students are required to do.
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because the meanings of these
words don’t fit the context of the sentence. “Coercive” and “forcible”
suggest that threats or force are used to make someone do something.
“Imperative” suggests that something is very important or necessary.
None of these words is appropriate to use when describing the
volunteering that students are required to do.

QUESTION 19

Choice D is the best answer. The semicolon is used correctly to
separate the independent clause that begins with “she” from the
independent clause that begins with “they.” In addition, this choice
contains no unnecessary punctuation.
Choice A is incorrect because a comma can’t be used by itself to
join two independent clauses. Choice B is incorrect because it’s
unnecessary to place a comma between the adverb “then” and the
verb “did,” which the adverb describes. Choice C is incorrect because
no punctuation is needed to separate the subject “they” from the
adverb “then.”

QUESTION 20

Choice B is the best answer because “than did students who were”
results in a logical comparison between two types of students: those
who were required to volunteer (“they then did”) and those who
weren’t (“than did those”).
Choices A and C are incorrect because each illogically compares
“hours” to students (“they”). Choice D is incorrect because it results in
a nonstandard expression; “less” is already comparative, meaning that
“compared with” isn’t appropriate.

QUESTION 21

Choice C is the best answer. The idea that schools should focus on
offering arrangements that make volunteering an easy and attractive
choice most effectively sets up the point made in the next sentence:
more students willingly volunteer when schools tell them about
volunteering opportunities and connect them with organizations.

397

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because they don’t effectively set
up the point made in the next sentence. The ideas that schools have
to recognize that not all students are equally well suited to the same
activities, should allow students to spend their time participating
in athletics and other extracurricular activities, and are advised to
recognize the limits of their ability to influence their students don’t set
up the point that students willingly volunteer when schools connect
them to volunteer opportunities and organizations.

QUESTION 22

Choice B is the best answer. This choice provides a conclusion
that states the main claim of the passage: schools that don’t make
volunteering compulsory will produce more engaged, enthusiastic
volunteers than will schools that require volunteer work.
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect. The idea that schools should find
volunteers for organizations in the United States, that psychological
and economic studies have revolutionized understandings of
volunteerism, or that students should choose charitable work that
suits their interests and values doesn’t state the passage’s main claim
that schools that don’t require volunteering produce more engaged,
enthusiastic volunteers.

QUESTION 23

Choice C is the best answer. The present perfect tense verb “have
believed” correctly indicates that scientists in the past believed
that the corpus callosum enables complex tasks and that scientists
continue to hold this belief in the present.
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because they don’t describe a belief
that originated in the past and continues in the present. The present
progressive tense verb “are believing,” the future progressive tense
verb “will be believing,” and the simple present tense verb “believe”
aren’t appropriate to use in a case that requires a present perfect
tense verb.

QUESTION 24

Choice A is the best answer. This choice concisely defines
handedness without unnecessarily repeating the ideas of preference
or consistency.
Choices B and C are incorrect because “favor the use of” and “could be
chosen,” respectively, repeat the idea of “prefer,” which appears earlier
in the sentence. Choice D is incorrect because “on a regular basis”
is synonymous with “consistently,” which also appears earlier in
the sentence.

398

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

QUESTION 25

Choice A is the best answer. No punctuation is necessary between the
noun “trait” and the preposition “other than.”
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because neither a comma,
a semicolon, nor a colon is necessary to separate the noun “trait”
from the phrase that follows.

QUESTION 26

Choice B is the best answer. The phrase “correlates with” is idiomatic
when indicating that two things are directly related to each other. In
the passage, handedness in marsupials is believed to be related to the
trait of bipedalism in those mammals.
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because “links as,” “correlates from,”
and “links on” aren’t idiomatic when indicating that two things are
directly related to each other.

QUESTION 27

Choice D is the best answer. According to the graph, positive mean
handedness index scores indicated a left-forelimb preference and
negative scores indicated a right-forelimb preference.
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because they don’t accurately reflect
the information in the graph.

QUESTION 28

Choice B is the best answer. The comma after “kangaroo” and
before the conjunction “and” is used correctly to separate the last
two items, “red kangaroo” and “brush-tailed bettong,” in the list of
bipedal marsupials.
Choice A is incorrect because the comma needs to be placed
immediately before the conjunction “and,” not after it. Choice C is
incorrect because a semicolon isn’t used to separate individual items
in a simple list. Choice D is incorrect because a dash isn’t used to
separate items in a list, and the comma after “and” is unnecessary.

QUESTION 29

Choice C is the best answer. According to the graph, the four bipedal
marsupials had positive mean handedness index values between 0.4
and 0.6, which revealed their preference for using their left forelimbs.
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because they don’t accurately reflect
the data in the graph. The four bipedal marsupials didn’t have positive
mean handedness index values less than 0.2 or greater than 0.6, and
they didn’t have mean handedness index values of 0.

399

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

QUESTION 30

Choice C is the best answer. The transitional phrase “in contrast
to” provides the best transition from the previous paragraph, which
illustrates bipedal marsupials’ forelimb preference, to this paragraph,
which discusses how quadrupedal marsupials differ from their bipedal
counterparts by not showing a strong forelimb preference.
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because they don’t provide a
transition from the previous paragraph. The introductory phrases
“having four feet,” “like most other mammals,” and “while using
their forelimbs for eating” don’t establish a connection between the
discussion of bipedal marsupials’ forelimb preference in the previous
paragraph and quadrupedal marsupials’ forelimb preference in
this paragraph.

QUESTION 31

Choice B is the best answer. A main claim of the passage is that
scientists now believe there’s a correlation between bipedalism and
handedness in marsupials. Choice B, by mentioning that bipedal
marsupials in the study demonstrated handedness, references this
main claim.
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because they don’t present a main
claim of the passage. The passage isn’t about how kangaroos still
don’t exhibit handedness to the extent that humans do, the many
things scientists don’t understand about the marsupial brain, or
additional studies on the phenomenon of handedness that will need to
be performed with other mammals.

QUESTION 32

Choice B is the best answer. “Which” is a standard relative pronoun in
reference to a concept such as a task.
Choice A is incorrect because “whom” is used to refer to people, not
concepts. Choice C is incorrect because “what” isn’t a typical relative
pronoun and isn’t idiomatic in context (“tasks in what handedness
may confer an evolutionary advantage”). Choice D is incorrect because
“whose” nonsensically suggests that tasks have handedness.

QUESTION 33

Choice A is the best answer. No change is needed because this choice
concludes the passage by recalling a topic from the first paragraph
that requires additional research: scientists’ enduring question about
how the left and right hemispheres of marsupials’ brains communicate
since these mammals lack a corpus callosum.

400

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because none of these choices
concludes the passage by recalling a topic from the first paragraph
that requires additional research. The first paragraph doesn’t refer to
the minority of humans who are left handed, the fact that studies like
this one may someday yield insights into the causes of neurological
disorders, or an additional study to examine handedness in other
animals that sometimes stand upright.

QUESTION 34

Choice C is the best answer. “Although these levels are impressive”
provides the most effective transition from the previous sentence,
which indicates the percent of surveyed companies that provide
employees with tuition assistance, to the information that follows in
this sentence, that even more companies should consider providing
such assistance.
Choice A is incorrect because “despite these findings” suggests
that regardless of the percentages, more companies should consider
providing tuition assistance, which is illogical. Choice B is incorrect
because the information that follows in the sentence isn’t additional
to the 2014 study. Choice D is incorrect because the issue of whether
companies want or don’t want to provide tuition assistance isn’t
mentioned in the previous sentence.

QUESTION 35

Choice D is the best answer. This choice most effectively establishes
the main idea of the passage, which is that companies should offer
tuition assistance because doing so helps attract and retain employees.
This main idea is supported in the second paragraph, which argues
that tuition assistance appeals to highly motivated and disciplined
individuals, and in the third paragraph, which claims that employees
receiving tuition assistance often stay with their employers even after
they complete their degrees.
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because they don’t establish
the passage’s main idea. The passage isn’t about increasing
customer satisfaction, solving the problem of rising tuition costs,
or strengthening the US economy.

QUESTION 36

Choice C is the best answer. The plural noun “workers” correctly
indicates that companies have more than one worker. The plural
noun “opportunities” indicates that employers offer workers multiple
chances for personal and professional development.
Choices A and B are incorrect because the plural possessive
nouns “workers’” and “opportunities’” should be the plural nouns
“workers” and “opportunities,” since nothing belongs to the workers

401

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

or opportunities in the sentence. Choice D is incorrect because the
singular nouns “worker” and “opportunity” should be plural, and the
apostrophes indicating possession aren’t needed.

QUESTION 37

Choice B is the best answer. The main verb “stressed” provides a
simple predicate for the subject “John Fox” to create a grammatically
complete sentence.
Choices A and C are incorrect because “who stressed” and “stressing”
leave the sentence without an independent clause. Choice D is
incorrect because although “he stressed” gives the sentence an
independent clause, that clause is improperly joined by “and” to the
phrases “John Fox” and “the director of dealer training at Fiat Chrysler
Automobiles in the United States.”

QUESTION 38

Choice C is the best answer. This choice most effectively combines
the sentences at the underlined portion because the pronoun “which”
creates a relative clause (“which . . . workers”) that clearly and
concisely describes “retain.”
Choice A is incorrect because “retention” repeats the idea of “retain,”
which is already mentioned in the sentence. Choice B is incorrect because
“retaining” repeats the idea of “retain,” and the pronoun “whom” repeats
the idea of “employees.” Choice D is incorrect because the pronoun “that”
doesn’t have a clear antecedent and therefore creates a vague sentence.

QUESTION 39

Choice C is the best answer. The subordinate conjunction “because”
begins the dependent clause “because their new qualifications
give them opportunities for advancement within the company.”
No punctuation is needed to separate this dependent clause from the
independent clause that directly precedes it.
Choices A and D are incorrect because placing a period or a semicolon
after “degrees” results in a rhetorically ineffective sentence fragment.
Choice B is incorrect because no punctuation is needed between the
noun and subordinate conjunction. (Although colons can be used to
introduce additional explanatory information in a sentence, they’re
not typically used between a main clause and a dependent clause
beginning with a subordinate conjunction such as “because.”)

QUESTION 40

Choice D is the best answer. The comma after “(UTC)” is paired
correctly with the comma after “Lincoln” to set off grammatically
nonessential information. The information between the commas, which
describes who Valerie Lincoln is, could be removed and the sentence
would still make sense.
402

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

Choice A is incorrect because a comma is needed after “(UTC)” to
set off the grammatically nonessential phrase. Choices B and C are
incorrect because neither a dash nor a colon can be paired with a
comma to set off grammatically nonessential information.

QUESTION 41

Choice A is the best answer. The adjective “deep” is used
idiomatically with “knowledge” to indicate that Lincoln possessed
extensive, in-depth information about her industry.
Choice B is incorrect because “hidden” doesn’t make sense within the
context of the sentence. A person whose knowledge is hidden wouldn’t
be an asset to a company. Choices C and D are incorrect because
“large” and “spacious” aren’t idiomatic when describing the extent of
a person’s knowledge.

QUESTION 42

Choice D is the best answer. “Keeping down costs” clearly and
concisely identifies what businesses have succeeded in doing.
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because they’re redundant. In
choice A, the verbs “minimizing” and “keeping down” are synonyms,
so only one is needed in the sentence. In choice B, “employees’
coursework” isn’t needed because this phrase already appears
in the sentence. In choice C, “being effective” repeats the idea of
“succeeded,” which appears earlier in the sentence.

QUESTION 43

Choice A is the best answer. The infinitive “[to] divert” is
grammatically correct when preceded by “are likely,” indicating that
classes can redirect employees’ time and energy away from their jobs.
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because “diverted,” “in diverting,”
and “diversions for” create ungrammatical sentences.

QUESTION 44

Choice D is the best answer. To make the passage most logical, the
sentence should be placed after the last sentence of paragraph 4.
The use of “still” in the inserted sentence indicates that a contrast to
what was stated previously will follow. Paragraph 4 ends by stating
that tuition reimbursement may not be appropriate in all cases, and
the inserted sentence indicates that despite this fact, employers
should give serious thought to investing in reimbursement programs.
Moreover, the inserted sentence restates the passage’s main claim and,
therefore, effectively concludes the passage.
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because placing the sentence at the
end of paragraph 1, 2, or 3 would result in an illogical passage.

403

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

Section 3: Math Test – No Calculator
QUESTION 1

Choice B is correct. Subtracting z from both sides of 2z + 1 = z results
in z + 1 = 0. Subtracting 1 from both sides of z + 1 = 0 results in z = −1.
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect. When each of these values
is substituted for z in the given equation, the result is a false
statement. Substituting −2 for z yields 2(−2) + 1 = −2, or −3 = −2.
1
1
1
1
Substituting ​  —  ​ for z yields 2 ​  — ​  + 1 = — , or 2 = —
2
2
2
2
1 for z yields 2(1) + 1 = 1, or 3 = 1.

( )

QUESTION 2

Choice C is correct. To complete the purchase, the initial payment of
$60 plus the w weekly payments of $30 must be equivalent to the $300
price of the television. The total, in dollars, of w weekly payments of
$30 can be expressed by 30w. It follows that 300 = 30w + 60 can be
used to find the number of weekly payments, w, required to complete
the purchase.
Choice A is incorrect. Since the television is to be purchased with an
initial payment and w weekly payments, the price of the television must
be equivalent to the sum, not the difference, of these payments. Choice B
is incorrect. This equation represents a situation where the television is
purchased using only w weekly payments of $30, with no initial payment
of $60. Choice D is incorrect. This equation represents a situation
where the w weekly payments are $60 each, not $30 each, and the initial
payment is $30, not $60. Also, since the television is to be purchased
with weekly payments and an initial payment, the price of the television
must be equivalent to the sum, not the difference, of these payments.

QUESTION 3

Choice B is correct. Since the relationship between the merchandise
weight x and the shipping charge f (x ) is linear, a function in the
form f (x ) = mx + b, where m and b are constants, can be used. In
this situation, the constant m represents the additional shipping
charge, in dollars, for each additional pound of merchandise shipped,
and the constant b represents a one-time charge, in dollars, for
shipping any weight, in pounds, of merchandise. Using any two
pairs of values from the table, such as (10, 21.89) and (20, 31.79),
and dividing the difference in the charges by the difference in the
31.79 − 21.89
 ​, which simplifies
weights gives the value of m: m = —
20 − 10
9.9
to ​  — , or 0.99. Substituting the value of m and any pair of values from
10
the table, such as (10, 21.89), for x and f (x ), respectively, gives the
value of b: 21.89 = 0.99(10) + b, or b = 11.99. Therefore, the function
f (x ) = 0.99x + 11.99 can be used to determine the total shipping charge
f (x ), in dollars, for an order with a merchandise weight of x pounds.
404

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

Choices A, C, and D are incorrect. If any pair of values from the table
is substituted for x and f (x ), respectively, in these functions, the
result is false. For example, substituting 10 for x and 21.89 for f (x )
in f (x ) = 0.99x yields 21.89 = 0.99(10), or 21.89 = 9.9, which is false.
Similarly, substituting the values (10, 21.89) for x and f (x ) into the
functions in choices C and D results in 21.89 = 33.9 and 21.89 = 50.84,
respectively. Both are false.

QUESTION 4

Choice C is correct. It’s given that the graph represents y = h(x ), thus the
y-coordinate of each point on the graph corresponds to the height, in feet, of
a Doric column with a base diameter of x feet. A Doric column with a base
diameter of 5 feet is represented by the point (5, 35), and a Doric column
with a base diameter of 2 feet is represented by the point (2, 14). Therefore,
the column with a base diameter of 5 feet has a height of 35 feet, and the
column with a base diameter of 2 feet has a height of 14 feet. It follows that
the difference in heights of these two columns is 35 − 14, or 21 feet.
Choice A is incorrect. This value is the slope of the line and represents
the increase in the height of a Doric column for each increase in the
base diameter by 1 foot. Choice B is incorrect. This value represents
the height of a Doric column with a base diameter of 2 feet, or the
difference in height between a Doric column with base diameter of
5 feet and a Doric column with base diameter of 3 feet. Choice D is
incorrect and may result from conceptual or calculation errors.

QUESTION 5

_

Choice
A is correct. The expression √9x 2 can be rewritten as
_
_
( √9 ​  )(​​ √x 2 ​  ). The square root symbol in an expression represents
_
the principal square root, or the positive square root, thus_
√9 = 3.
2
Since x > 0, taking
_the square root of the second factor, √x  ​, gives x.
2
It follows that √9x is equivalent to 3x.
_

_

Choice B is incorr
ect and may result from rewriting √ 9x 2 as ( √9 ​  )(​​ x 2 )
_
_
rather than ( √9 ​  )(​​ √x 2 ​  ). Choices C and D are incorrect and may result
from misunderstanding the operation indicated by a radical symbol.
In both of these choices, instead of finding the square root of the
coefficient 9, the coefficient has been multiplied by 2. Additionally, in
choice D, x 2 has been squared to give x 4, instead of taking the square
root of x 2 to get x.

QUESTION 6

Choice A is correct. Factoring the numerator of the rational

(x + 1)(x − 1)
(x + 1)(x − 1)
x2 − 1
— . The expression —  ​
expression ​  —
x − 1 yields
x−1
x−1

(
(

)(
)(

)
) (

x+1 x
−1
x
−1
—
—
can be rewritten as ​  —
1 ​  ​​ ​  x − 1 ​  . Since x − 1 = 1, when x is not equal
x+1 x
−1
x
+1
—
—
to 1, it follows that ​  —
1 ​  ​​ ​  x − 1 ​  = ​  1 ​  ​(1) or x + 1. Therefore, the
given equation is equivalent to x + 1 = −2. Subtracting 1 from both
sides of x + 1 = −2 yields x = −3.

)

405

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect. Substituting 0, 1, or −1, respectively,
for x in the given equation yields a false statement. Substituting
02 − 1
0 for x in the given equation yields — = −2 or 1 = −2, which is
0−1
false. Substituting 1 for x in the given equation makes the left-hand
0
12 − 1 —
side ​  —
equal to −2. Substituting
1 − 1 ​ = ​  0 , which is undefined and not
(−1)2 − 1
−1 for x in the given equation yields ​  —
−1 − 1 = −2, or 0 = −2, which is
false. Therefore, these values don’t satisfy the given equation.

QUESTION 7

Choice D is correct. Since y = f (x ), the value of f (0) is equal to the
value of f (x ), or y, when x = 0. The graph indicates that when x = 0,
y = 4. It follows that the value of f (0) = 4.
Choice A is incorrect. If the value of f (0) were 0, then when x = 0, the value
of f (x ), or y, would be 0 and the graph would pass through the point (0, 0).
Choice B is incorrect. If the value of f (0) were 2, then when x = 0, the value
of f (x ), or y, would be 2 and the graph would pass through the point (0, 2).
Choice C is incorrect. If the value of f (0) were 3, then when x = 0, the value
of f (x ), or y, would be 3 and the graph would pass through the point (0, 3).

QUESTION 8

_

Choice C is correct. Since point B lies on AD , angles ABC and
CBD are supplementary. It’s given that angle ABC is a right angle;
therefore, its measure is 90°. It follows that the measure of angle CBD
is 180° − 90°, or 90°. By the angle addition postulate, the measure of
angle CBD is equivalent to x ° + 2x ° + 2x °. Therefore, 90 = x + 2x + 2x.
Combining like terms gives 90 = 5x. Dividing both sides of this
equation by 5 yields x = 18. Therefore, the value of 3x is 3(18), or 54.
Choice A is incorrect. This is the value of x. Choice B is incorrect.
This is the value of 2x. Choice D is incorrect. This is the value of 4x.

QUESTION 9

Choice C is correct. The equation defining any line can be written
in the form y = mx + b, where m is the slope of the line and b is the
y-coordinate of the y-intercept. Line ℓ passes through the point (0, −4),
which is the y-intercept. Therefore, for line ℓ, b = −4. The slope of a
line is the ratio of the difference between the y-coordinates of any
two points to the difference between the x-coordinates of the same
points. Calculating the slope using two points that line ℓ passes
0 − (−4)
4
−1. Since m = −1
through, (−4, 0) and (0, −4), gives m = _ = — ​
(−4) − 0 −4
and b = −4, the equation of line ℓ can be written as y = (−1)x + (−4),
or y = −x − 4. Adding x to both sides of y = −x − 4 yields x + y = −4.
Choices A and B are incorrect. These equations both represent lines
with a positive slope, but line ℓ has a negative slope. Choice D is
incorrect. This equation represents a line that passes through the
points (4, 0) and (0, 4), not the points (−4, 0) and (0, −4).
406

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

QUESTION 10

Choice D is correct. Since the graph represents the equation
y = 2x 2 + 10x + 12, it follows that each point (x, y ) on the graph is a
solution to this equation. Since the graph crosses the y-axis at (0, k ),
then substituting 0 for x and k for y in y = 2x 2 + 10x + 12 creates a true
statement: k = 2(0)2 + 10(0) + 12, or k = 12.
Choice A is incorrect. If k = 2 when x = 0, it follows that
2 = 2(0)2 + 10(0) + 12, or 2 = 12, which is false. Choice B is incorrect.
If k = 6 when x = 0, it follows that 6 = 2(0)2 + 10(0) + 12, or 6 = 12,
which is false. Choice C is incorrect. If k = 10 when x = 0, it follows
that 10 = 2(0)2 + 10(0) + 12, or 10 = 12, which is false.

QUESTION 11

Choice A is correct. A circle in the xy-plane with center (h, k )
and radius r is defined by the equation (x − h )2 + (y − k )2 = r 2.
Therefore, an equation of a circle with center (5, 7) and radius 2 is
(x − 5)2 + (y − 7)2 = 22, or (x − 5)2 + (y − 7)2 = 4.
Choice B is incorrect. This equation defines a circle with center
(−5, −7) and radius 2. Choice C is incorrect.
This equation defines
_
a circle with center (5, 7) and radius √2 ​_
This equation defines a circle with center (−5, −7) and radius √2 ​.

QUESTION 12

Choice B is correct. Since figures are drawn to scale unless otherwise
stated and triangle ABC is similar to triangle DEF, it follows that the
measure of angle B is equal to the measure of angle E. Furthermore,
it follows that side AB corresponds to side DE and that side BC
corresponds to side EF. For similar triangles, corresponding sides
AB DE
are proportional, so — = — . In right triangle DEF, the cosine of
BC EF
angle E, or cos(E ), is equal to the length of the side adjacent to angle E
divided by the length of the hypotenuse in triangle DEF. Therefore,
AB
DE
12
cos(E ) = — , which is equivalent to — . Therefore, cos(E ) = — .
13
EF
BC
Choice A is incorrect. This value represents the tangent of angle F,
or tan(F ), which is defined as the length of the side opposite angle F
divided by the length of the side adjacent to angle F. Choice C is
incorrect. This value represents the tangent of angle E, or tan(E ), which
is defined as the length of the side opposite angle E divided by the
length of the side adjacent to angle E. Choice D is incorrect. This value
represents the sine of angle E, or sin(E ), which is defined as the length
of the side opposite angle E divided by the length of the hypotenuse.

QUESTION 13

Choice C is correct. The x-intercepts of the graph of f (x ) = x 2 + 5x + 4
are the points (x, f (x )) on the graph where f (x ) = 0. Substituting 0
for f (x ) in the function equation yields 0 = x 2 + 5x + 4. Factoring
the right-hand side of 0 = x 2 + 5x + 4 yields 0 = (x + 4)(x + 1).
407

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

If 0 = (x + 4)(x + 1), then 0 = x + 4 or 0 = x + 1. Solving both of these
equations for x yields x = −4 and x = −1. Therefore, the x-intercepts of
the graph of f (x ) = x 2 + 5x + 4 are (−4, 0) and (−1, 0). Since both points
lie on the x-axis, the distance between (−4, 0) and (−1, 0) is equivalent to
the number of unit spaces between −4 and −1 on the x-axis, which is 3.
Choice A is incorrect. This is the distance from the origin to the
x-intercept (−1, 0). Choice B is incorrect and may result from incorrectly
calculating the x-intercepts. Choice D is incorrect. This is the distance
from the origin to the x-intercept (−4, 0).

QUESTION 14

_

Choice B is correct. Squaring both sides of the equation √ 4x = x − 3
yields 4x = (x − 3)2, or 4x = (x − 3)(x − 3). Applying the distributive
property on the right-hand side of the equation 4x = (x − 3)(x − 3)
yields 4x = x 2 − 3x − 3x + 9. Subtracting 4x from both sides of
4x = x 2 − 3x − 3x + 9 yields 0 = x 2 − 3x − 3x − 4x + 9, which can
be rewritten as 0 = x 2 − 10x + 9. Factoring the right-hand side of
0 = x 2 − 10x + 9 gives 0 = (x − 1)(x − 9). By the zero product property,
if 0 = (x − 1)(x − 9), then 0 = x − 1 or 0 = x − 9. Adding 1 to both sides
of 0 = x − 1 gives x = 1. Adding 9 to both sides of 0 = x − 9 gives x = 9.
Substituting these values for x into the given equation will determine
whether they satisfy
_the equation._Substituting 1 for x in the given
equation yields √ 4(1) = 1 − 3, or ​, which is false. Therefore,
x = 1 doesn’t satisfy the_
given equation._
Substituting 9 for x in the
given equation yields ​or √ 36 = 6, which is true. Therefore,
x = 9 satisfies the given equation.
Choices A and
C are incorrect because x = 1 doesn’t satisfy the given
_
equation: √ 4x represents the principal square root of 4x, which can’t
be negative. Choice D is incorrect because x = 9 does satisfy the
given equation.

QUESTION 15

Choice A is correct. A system of two linear equations has no solution if
the graphs of the lines represented by the equations are parallel and are
not equivalent. Parallel lines have equal slopes but different y-intercepts.
The slopes and y-intercepts for the two given equations can be found by
solving each equation for y in terms of x, thus putting the equations in
a
slope-intercept form. This yields y = 3x + 6 and y = − ​ _ ​   x + 2. The slope
2
and y-intercept of the line with equation −3x + y = 6 are 3 and (0, 6),
respectively. The slope and y-intercept of the line with equation ax + 2y = 4
a
are represented by the expression − ​ _ and the point (0, 2), respectively.
2
The value of a can be found by setting the two slopes equal to each other,
a
which gives − ​ _ = 3. Multiplying both sides of this equation by −2 gives
2
a = −6. When a = −6, the lines are parallel and have different y-intercepts.

( )

408

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because these values of a would
result in two lines that are not parallel, and therefore the resulting
system of equations would have a solution.

QUESTION 16

The correct answer is 2200. If the total shipping cost was $47,000,
then T = 47,000. If 3000 units were shipped to the farther location,
then f = 3000. Substituting 47,000 for T and 3000 for f in the equation
T = 5c + 12f yields 47,000 = 5c + 12(3000). Multiplying 12 by 3000
yields 47,000 = 5c + 36,000. Subtracting 36,000 from both sides of the
equation yields 11,000 = 5c. Dividing both sides by 5 yields c = 2200.
Therefore, 2200 units were shipped to the closer location.

QUESTION 17

The correct answer is 5. By definition of absolute value, if | 2x + 1 | = 5,
then 2x + 1 = 5 or −(2x + 1) = 5, which can be rewritten as 2x + 1 = −5.
Subtracting 1 from both sides of 2x + 1 = 5 and 2x + 1 = −5 yields
2x = 4 and 2x = −6, respectively. Dividing both sides of 2x = 4 and
2x = −6 by 2 yields x = 2 and x = −3, respectively. If a and b are the
solutions to the given equation, then a = 2 and b = −3. It follows then
that | a − b | = | 2 − (−3) | = | 5 |, which is 5. Similarly, if a = −3 and b = 2,
it follows that | a − b | = | −3 − 2 | = | −5 |, which is also 5.

QUESTION 18

The correct answer is 1.21. It’s given that each year, the value of the
antique is estimated to increase by 10% over its value the previous
year. Increasing a quantity by 10% is equivalent to the quantity
increasing to 110% of its original value or multiplying the original
quantity by 1.1. Therefore, 1 year after the purchase, the estimated
value of the antique is 200(1.1) dollars. Then, 2 years after purchase,
the estimated value of the antique is 200(1.1)(1.1), or 200(1.21) dollars.
It’s given that the estimated value of the antique after 2 years is
200a dollars. Therefore, 200(1.21) = 200a. It follows that a = 1.21.

QUESTION 19

The correct answer is 2500. Adding the given equations yields
(2x + 3y) + (3x + 2y) = (1200 + 1300). Combining like terms yields
5x + 5y = 2500. Therefore, the value of 5x + 5y is 2500.

QUESTION 20

The correct answer is 20. Factoring the expression u 2 − t 2 yields
(u − t )(u + t ). Therefore, the expression (u − t )(u2 − t 2) can be rewritten
as (u − t )(u − t )(u + t ). Substituting 5 for u + t and 2 for u − t in this
expression yields (2)(2)(5), which is equal to 20.

409

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

Section 4: Math Test – Calculator
QUESTION 1

Choice B is correct. It’s given that the helicopter’s initial height is
40 feet above the ground and that when the helicopter’s altitude begins
to increase, it increases at a rate of 21 feet per second. Therefore, the
altitude gain t seconds after the helicopter begins rising is represented
by the expression 21t. Adding this expression to the helicopter’s
initial height gives the helicopter’s altitude above the ground y, in feet,
t seconds after the helicopter begins to gain altitude: y = 40 + 21t.
Choice A is incorrect. This is the helicopter’s altitude above the
ground 1 second after it began to gain altitude, not t seconds after
it began to gain altitude. Choice C is incorrect because adding the
expression −21t makes this function represent a decrease in altitude.
Choice D is incorrect and is the result of using the initial height of
40 feet as the rate at which the helicopter’s altitude increases per
second and the rate of 21 feet per second as the initial height.

QUESTION 2

Choice A is correct. The text messaging plan charges a flat fee of $5
per month for up to 100 text messages. This is represented graphically
with a constant value of y = 5 for 0 ≤ x ≤ 100. After 100 messages, each
additional message sent costs $0.25. This is represented graphically
with an increase of 0.25 on the y-axis for every increase of 1 on the
x-axis. Choice A matches these descriptions.
Choice B is incorrect. This choice shows a linear decrease after x = 100,
indicating the price of the plan would decrease, rather than increase,
after 100 text messages. Choices C and D are incorrect. These choices
don’t represent a constant value of y = 5 for 0 ≤ x ≤ 100, which is needed
to represent the $5 per month for the first 100 text messages.

QUESTION 3

Choice B is correct. During the first 15 minutes Jake is in the theater,
or from 0 to 15 minutes, Jake’s popcorn amount decreases by half. This
is represented graphically by a linear decrease. From 15 to 45 minutes,
Jake stops eating popcorn. This is represented graphically by a
constant y-value. From 45 to 90 minutes, Jake eats more popcorn. This
is represented graphically by another linear decrease as the amount of
popcorn in the bag gradually goes down. At 90 minutes, Jake spills all
of his remaining popcorn. This is represented graphically by a vertical
drop in the y-value to 0. Choice B matches these representations.
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect. At no point during this period of
time did Jake buy more popcorn. All of these graphs represent an
increase in the amount of popcorn in Jake’s bag at some point during
this period of time.

410

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

QUESTION 4

Choice C is correct. Subtracting 20 from both sides of the given
equation yields −x = −5. Dividing both sides of the equation −x = −5 by
−1 yields x = 5. Lastly, substituting 5 for x in 3x yields the value of 3x,
or 3(5) = 15.
Choice A is incorrect. This is the value of x, not the value of 3x.
Choices B and D are incorrect. If 3x = 10 or 3x = 35, then it follows
35
35
10
10
that x = _ or x = _, respectively. Substituting ​  _ ​and ​  _ for x in the
3
3
3
3
50
25
_
_
given equation yields ​ 
= 15 and ​ 
= 15, respectively, both of which
3
3
are false statements. Since 3x = 10 and 3x = 35 both lead to false
statements, then 3x can’t be equivalent to either 10 or 35.

QUESTION 5

Choice C is correct. The value of f (−1) can be found by substituting
x+3
−1 + 3
.
−1 for x in the given function f (x ) = _ , which yields f (−1) = _  ​
2
2
2
Rewriting the numerator by adding −1 and 3 yields ​  _, which equals 1.
2
Therefore, f (−1) = 1.
Choice A is incorrect and may result from miscalculating the value
−1 + 3
−4
of ​  _  ​
as ​  _, or −2. Choice B is incorrect and may result from
2
2
misinterpreting the value of x as the value of f (−1). Choice D
is incorrect and may result from adding the expression −1 + 3 in
the numerator.

QUESTION 6

Choice D is correct. To determine which option is equivalent to
the given expression, the expression can be rewritten using the
distributive property by multiplying each term of the binomial (x 2 − 3x )
by 2x, which gives 2x 3 − 6x 2.
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect and may result from incorrectly
applying the laws of exponents or from various computation errors
when rewriting the expression.

QUESTION 7

Choice B is correct. Selecting employees from each store at random
is most appropriate because it’s most likely to ensure that the
group surveyed will accurately represent each store location and all
employees.
Choice A is incorrect. Surveying employees at a single store location
will only provide an accurate representation of employees at that
location, not at all 50 store locations. Choice C is incorrect. Surveying
the highest- and lowest-paid employees will not give an accurate
representation of employees across all pay grades at the company.

411

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

Choice D is incorrect. Collecting only the first 50 responses mimics the
results of a self-selected survey. For example, the first 50 employees
to respond to the survey could be motivated by an overwhelming
positive or negative experience and thus will not accurately represent
all employees.

QUESTION 8

Choice C is correct. The graph for Ian shows that the initial deposit
was $100 and that each week the total amount deposited increased by
$100. Therefore, Ian deposited $100 each week. The graph for Jeremy
shows that the initial deposit was $300 and that each week the total
amount deposited increased by $50. Therefore, Jeremy deposited $50
each week. Thus, Ian deposited $50 more than Jeremy did each week.
Choice A is incorrect. This is the difference between the initial
deposits in the savings accounts. Choice B is incorrect. This is the
amount Ian deposited each week. Choice D is incorrect. This is half the
amount that Jeremy deposited each week.

QUESTION 9

Choice C is correct. The value of the expression h(5) − h(3) can be
found by substituting 5 and 3 for x in the given function. Substituting
5 for x in the function yields h(5) = 25, which can be rewritten as
h(5) = 32. Substituting 3 for x in the function yields h(3) = 23, which can
be rewritten as h(3) = 8. Substituting these values into the expression
h(5) − h(3) produces 32 − 8 = 24.
Choice A is incorrect. This is the value of 5 − 3, not of h(5) − h(3).
Choice B is incorrect. This is the value of h(5 − 3), or h(2), not of
h(5) − h(3). Choice D is incorrect and may result from calculation errors.

QUESTION 10

Choice D is correct. The margin of error is applied to the sample
statistic to create an interval in which the population statistic most
likely falls. An estimate of 23% with a margin of error of 4% creates an
interval of 23% ± 4%, or between 19% and 27%. Thus, it’s plausible
that the percentage of students in the population who see a movie at
least once a month is between 19% and 27%.
Choice A is incorrect and may result from interpreting the estimate
of 23% as the minimum number of students in the population who
see a movie at least once per month. Choice B is incorrect and may
result from interpreting the estimate of 23% as the minimum number
of students in the population who see a movie at least once per month
and adding half of the margin of error to conclude that it isn’t possible
that more than 25% of students in the population see a movie at least
once per month. Choice C is incorrect and may result from interpreting
the sample statistic as the researcher’s level of confidence in the survey
results and applying the margin of error to the level of confidence.

412

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

QUESTION 11

Choice A is correct. The mean number of each list is found by dividing
the sum of all the numbers in each list by the count of the numbers
1+2+3+4+5+6
in each list. The mean of list A is ​  __ = 3.5, and
6
2__
+3+3+4+4+5
the mean of list B is ​ 
= 3.5. Thus, the means are the
6
same. The standard deviations can be compared by inspecting the
distances of the numbers in each list from the mean. List A contains
two numbers that are 0.5 from the mean, two numbers that are 1.5 from
the mean, and two numbers that are 2.5 from the mean. List B contains
four numbers that are 0.5 from the mean and two numbers that are 1.5
from the mean. Overall, list B contains numbers that are closer to the
mean than are the numbers in list A, so the standard deviations of the
lists are different.
Choice B is incorrect and may result from assuming that two data
sets with the same mean must also have the same standard deviation.
Choices C and D are incorrect and may result from an error in
calculating the means.

QUESTION 12

Choice C is correct. Let x represent the original price of the book.
Then, 40% off of x is (1 − 0.40)x, or 0.60x. Since the sale price is
$18.00, then 0.60x = 18. Dividing both sides of this equation by 0.60
yields x = 30. Therefore, the original price of the book was $30.
Choice A is incorrect and may result from computing 40% of the sale
price. Choice B is incorrect and may result from computing 40% off the
sale price instead of the original price. Choice D is incorrect and may
result from computing the original price of a book whose sale price is
$18 when the sale is for 60% off the original price.

QUESTION 13

Choice C is correct. According to the bar graph, the number of
insects in colony A at week 0 was approximately 80, and this number
decreased over each respective two-week period to approximately 50,
32, 25, and 18. Similarly, the graph shows that the number of insects
in colony B at week 0 was approximately 64, and this number also
decreased over each respective two-week period to approximately 60,
40, 38, and 10. Finally, the graph shows that the number of insects
in colony C at week 0 was approximately 58; however, the number of
insects increased in week 2, to approximately 140. Therefore, only
colony A and colony B showed a decrease in size every two weeks after
the initial treatment.
Choice A is incorrect. Colony B also showed a decrease in size every
two weeks. Choices B and D are incorrect. Colony C showed an
increase in size between weeks 0 and 2.

413

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

QUESTION 14

Choice A is correct. According to the bar graph, the total number
of insects in all three colonies in week 8 was approximately
20 + 10 + 50 = 80, and the total number of insects at the time of initial
treatment (week 0) was approximately 80 + 65 + 55 = 200. The ratio
of these approximations is 80 to 200, which is equivalent to 2 to 5.
Therefore, the ratio 2 to 5 is closest to the ratio of the total number of
insects in all three colonies in week 8 to the total number of insects at
the time of initial treatment.
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect and may result from setting up ratios
using weeks other than week 8 and week 0 or from calculation errors.

QUESTION 15

Choice B is correct. The formula for the volume V of a right circular
1
cone is V = _ ​  πr 2h, where r is the radius of the base and h is the height
3
of the cone. It’s given that the cone’s volume is 24π cubic inches and its
1
height is 2 inches. Substituting 24π for V and 2 for h yields 24π = _ ​  πr 2(2).
3
2π
Rewriting the right-hand side of this equation yields 24π = ​ _ ​  r 2, which
3
is equivalent to 36 = r 2. Taking the square root of both sides of this
equation gives r = ±6. Since the radius is a measure of length, it can’t be
negative. Therefore, the radius of the base of the cone is 6 inches.

( )

Choice A is incorrect and may result from using the formula for the
volume of a right circular cylinder instead of a right circular cone.
Choice C is incorrect. This is the diameter of the cone. Choice D is
incorrect and may result from not taking the square root when solving
for the radius.

QUESTION 16

Choice C is correct. It’s given that the population of City X was 120,000
in 2010, and that it increased by 20% from 2010 to 2015. Therefore,
the population of City X in 2015 was 120,000 (1 + 0.20) = 144,000.
It’s also given that the population of City Y decreased by 10% from
2010 to 2015. If y represents the population of City Y in 2010, then
144,000
y(1 − 0.10) = 144,000. Solving this equation for y yields y = _ ​.
1 − 0.10
144,000
Simplifying the denominator yields _ , or 160,000.
0.90
Choice A is incorrect. If the population of City Y in 2010 was
60,000, then the population of City Y in 2015 would have been
60,000(0.90) = 54,000, which is not equal to the City X population in
2015 of 144,000. Choice B is incorrect because 90,000(0.90) = 81,000,
which is not equal to the City X population in 2015 of 144,000.
Choice D is incorrect because 240,000(0.90) = 216,000, which is not
equal to the City X population in 2015 of 144,000.

414

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

QUESTION 17

4
Choice D is correct. Dividing both sides of the equation V = _ ​  πr 3
3
3V
4
by ​  _ ​  π results in ​  _ = r 3. Taking the cube root of both sides produces ​
4π _
3
_
3 3V
3 3V
_
 ​= r. Therefore, ​  _ ​ ​ gives the radius of the sphere in terms of the
​ 
4π
4π
volume of the sphere.

√

√

Choice A is incorrect. This expression is equivalent to the reciprocal of
r 3. Choice B is incorrect. This expression is equivalent to r 3. Choice C
is incorrect. This expression is equivalent to the reciprocal of r.

QUESTION 18

Choice C is correct. It’s given that the tablet user did not answer
“Never,” so the tablet user could have answered only “Rarely,” “Often,”
or “Always.” These answers make up 24.3% + 13.5% + 30.9% = 68.7%
of the answers the tablet users gave in the survey. The answer
“Always” makes up 30.9% of the answers tablet users gave in the
0.309
30.9%
survey. Thus, the probability is ​  _ , or ​  _ = 0.44978, which
68.7%
0.687
rounds up to 0.45.
Choice A is incorrect. This reflects the tablet users in the survey who
answered “Always.” Choice B is incorrect. This reflects all tablet users
who did not answer “Never” or “Always.” Choice D is incorrect. This
reflects all tablet users in the survey who did not answer “Never.”

QUESTION 19

Choice D is correct. The vertex form of a quadratic equation is
y = n(x − h)2 + k, where (h, k) gives the coordinates of the vertex of the
parabola in the xy-plane and the sign of the constant n determines
whether the parabola opens upward or downward. If n is negative,
the parabola opens downward and the vertex is the maximum.
The given equation has the values h = 3, k = a, and n = −1. Therefore,
the vertex of the parabola is (3, a) and the parabola opens downward.
Thus, the parabola’s maximum occurs at (3, a).
Choice A is incorrect and may result from interpreting the given
equation as representing a parabola in which the vertex is a minimum,
not a maximum, and from misidentifying the value of h in the given
equation as −3, not 3. Choice B is incorrect and may result from
interpreting the given equation as representing a parabola in which the
vertex is a minimum, not a maximum. Choice C is incorrect and may
result from misidentifying the value of h in the given equation as −3,
not 3.

415

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

QUESTION 20

Choice C is correct. Let m be the minimum value of the original data
set. The range of a data set is the difference between the maximum
value and the minimum value. The range of the original data set is
therefore 84 − m. The new data set consists of the original set and the
positive integer 96. Thus, the new data set has the same minimum
m and a maximum of 96. Therefore, the range of the new data set is
96 − m. The difference in the two ranges can be found by subtracting
the ranges: (96 − m) − (84 − m). Using the distributive property, this
can be rewritten as 96 − m − 84 + m, which is equal to 12. Therefore,
the range of the new data set must be 12 greater than the range of the
original data set.
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect. Only the maximum value of the
original data set is known, so the amount that the mean, median, and
standard deviation of the new data set differ from those of the original
data set can’t be determined.

QUESTION 21

Choice B is correct. It’s given that Clayton uses 100 milliliters of
the 20% by mass solution, so y = 100. Substituting 100 for y in the
given equation yields 0.10x + 0.20(100) = 0.18(x + 100), which can be
rewritten as 0.10x + 20 = 0.18x + 18. Subtracting 0.10x and 18 from
both sides of the equation gives 2 = 0.08x. Dividing both sides of this
equation by 0.08 gives x = 25. Thus, Clayton uses 25 milliliters of the 10%
by mass saline solution.
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect and may result from calculation errors.

QUESTION 22

Choice D is correct. It’s given that the number of people Eleanor
invited the first year was 30 and that the number of people invited
doubles each of the following years, which is the same as increasing
by a constant factor of 2. Therefore, the function f can be defined
by f (n ) = 30(2)n, where n is the number of years after Eleanor began
organizing the event. This is an increasing exponential function.
Choices A and B are incorrect. Linear functions increase or decrease
by a constant number over equal intervals, and exponential functions
increase or decrease by a constant factor over equal intervals.
Since the number of people invited increases by a constant factor
each year, the function f is exponential rather than linear. Choice C is
incorrect. The value of f (n ) increases as n increases, so the function f
is increasing rather than decreasing.

416

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

QUESTION 23

Choice A is correct. The slope-intercept form of a linear equation in
the xy-plane is y = mx + b, where m is the slope of the graph of the
equation and b is the y-coordinate of the y-intercept of the graph. Any
two ordered pairs (x1, y1) and (x2, y2) that satisfy a linear equation can
be used to compute the slope of the graph of the equation using the
y2 − y1
formula m = _
x2 − x1 . Substituting t he two pairs (a, 0) and (3a, −a) from
−a − 0
the table into the formula gives m = _ , which can be rewritten
3a − a
−a
1
as ​  _, or − _. Substituting t his value for m in the slope-intercept form
2a
2
1
of the equation produces y = − _x + b. Substituting values from the
2
1
ordered pair (a, 0) in the table into this equation produces 0 = − _ ​(a) + b,
2
a
which simplifies to b = _. Substituting t his value for b in the slope2
a
1
intercept form of the equation produces y = − _x + _. Rewriting this
2
2
1
equation in standard form by adding _x to both sides and then
2
multiplying both sides by 2 gives the equation x + 2y = a.
Choice B is incorrect and may result from a calculation error when
determining the y-intercept of the graph of the equation. Choices C
and D are incorrect and may result from an error in calculation when
determining the slope of the graph of the equation.

QUESTION 24

Choice B is correct. The slope-intercept form of a linear equation is
y = mx + b, where m is the slope of the graph of the equation and b is
the y-coordinate of the y-intercept of the graph. Any two ordered pairs
(x1, y1) and (x2, y2) that satisfy a linear equation can be used to compute
y2 − y1
the slope of the graph of the equation using the formula m = _
x2 − x1 ​.
Substituting the coordinates of (120, 60) and (160, 80), which lie on the
80 − 60
line of best fit, into this formula gives m = _ , which simplifies
160 − 120
20
to ​  _ , or 0.5. Substituting this value for m in the slope-intercept form
40
of the equation produces y = 0.5x + b. Substituting values from the
ordered pair (120, 60) into this equation produces 60 = 0.5(120) + b, so
b = 0. Substituting this value for b in the slope-intercept form of the
equation produces y = 0.5x + 0, or y = 0.5x.
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect and may result from an error in
calculation when determining the slope of the line of best fit.

QUESTION 25

Choice A is correct. The intersection point (x, y) of the two graphs
can be found by multiplying the second equation in the system
1.6x + 0.5y = −1.3 by 3, which gives 4.8x + 1.5y = −3.9. The y-terms in
the equation 4.8x + 1.5y = −3.9 and the first equation in the system
2.4x − 1.5y = 0.3 have coefficients that are opposites. Adding the left- and
right-hand sides of the equations 4.8x + 1.5y = −3.9 and 2.4x − 1.5y = 0.3
417

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

produces 7.2x + 0.0y = −3.6, which is equivalent to 7.2x = −3.6. Dividing
both sides of the equation by 7.2 gives x = −0.5. Therefore, the xcoordinate of the intersection point (x, y) of the system is −0.5.
Choice B is incorrect. An x-value of −0.25 produces y-values of −0.6
and −1.8 for each equation in the system, respectively. Since the same
ordered pair doesn’t satisfy both equations, neither point can be the
intersection point. Choice C is incorrect. An x-value of 0.8 produces
y-values of 1.08 and −5.16 for each equation in the system, respectively.
Since the same ordered pair doesn’t satisfy both equations, neither
point can be the intersection point. Choice D is incorrect. An x-value
of 1.75 produces y-values of 2.6 and −8.2 for each equation in the
system, respectively. Since the same ordered pair doesn’t satisfy both
equations, neither point can be the intersection point.

QUESTION 26

Choice D is correct. A model for a quantity that increases by r % per
r t
time period is an exponential function of the form P (t ) = I 1+ ​  _ ​  ​​ ,
100
where I is the initial value at time t = 0 and each increase of t by 1
represents 1 time period. It’s given that P (t ) is the number of pollen
grains per square centimeter and t is the number of years after the first
year the grains were deposited. There were 310 pollen grains at time
t = 0, so I = 310. This number increased 1% per year after year t = 0,
so r = 1. Substituting these values into the form of the exponential
1 t
function gives P (t ) = 310 1 + _ ​  , which can be rewritten as
100
P (t ) = 310(1.01)t.

(

(

)

)

Choices A, B, and C are incorrect and may result from errors made
when setting up an exponential function.

QUESTION 27

( )

2
Choice A is correct. Subtracting ​ _ ​  (9x − 6) from both sides of the given
3
1
equation yields −4 = ​ _ ​  (9x − 6), which can be rewritten as −4 = 3x − 2.
3
Choices B and D are incorrect and may result from errors made when
manipulating the equation. Choice C is incorrect. This is the value of x.

( )

QUESTION 28

Choice D is correct. The graph of a quadratic function in the form
f (x ) = a(x − b)(x − c) intersects the x-axis at (b, 0) and (c, 0). The graph
will be a parabola that opens upward if a is positive and downward if
a is negative. For the function f, a = 1, b = −3, and c = k. Therefore, the
graph of the function f opens upward and intersects the x-axis at (−3, 0)
and (k, 0). Since k is a positive integer, the intersection point (k, 0)
will have an x-coordinate that is a positive integer. The only graph
that opens upward, passes through the point (−3, 0), and has another
x-intercept with a positive integer as the x-coordinate is choice D.

418

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

Choices A and B are incorrect. Both graphs open downward rather
than upward. Choice C is incorrect. The graph doesn’t pass through
the point (−3, 0).

QUESTION 29

Choice D is correct. It’s given that L is the femur length, in inches, and
H is the height, in inches, of an adult male. Because L is multiplied
by 1.88 in the equation, for every increase in L by 1, the value of H
increases by 1.88. Therefore, the meaning of 1.88 in this context is that
a man’s height increases by approximately 1.88 inches for each oneinch increase in his femur length.
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect and may result from misinterpreting
the context and the values the variables are representing.

QUESTION 30

Choice A is correct. A segment can be drawn inside of quadrilateral
ABCD from point B to point F (not shown) on segment AD such that
segment BF is perpendicular to segment AD. This will create rectangle
FBCD such that FB = CD. This will also create right triangle ABF
1
such that FB = _ ​  AB. An acute angle in a right triangle has measure
2
30° if and only if the side opposite this angle is half the length of the
hypotenuse. (Such a triangle is called a 30°-60°-90° triangle.) Since
1
AB is the hypotenuse of right triangle ABF and FB = _ ​  AB, triangle ABF
2
must be a 30°-60°-90° triangle and angle ABF must measure 60°. The
measure of angle ABC equals the sum of the measures of angles ABF
and FBC. Because angle FBC is in rectangle FBCD, it has a measure
of 90°. Therefore, the measure of angle ABC, or angle B shown in the
original figure, is 60° + 90° = 150°.
Choice B is incorrect and may result from identifying triangle ABF as a
45°-45°-90° triangle and the measure of angle ABF as 45°. Choice C is
incorrect and may result from adding the measures of angles BAF and
FBC rather than angles ABF and FBC. Choice D is incorrect and may
result from finding the measure of angle D rather than angle B.

QUESTION 31

The correct answer is 6. It’s given that apples cost $0.65 each and
oranges cost $0.75 each. If x is the number of apples, the cost for
buying x apples is 0.65x dollars. If y is the number of oranges, the
cost for buying y oranges is 0.75y dollars. Lynne has $8.00 to spend;
therefore, the inequality for the number of apples and oranges Lynne
can buy is 0.65x + 0.75y ≤ 8.00. Since Lynne bought 5 apples, x = 5.
Substituting 5 for x yields 0.65(5) + 0.75y ≤ 8.00, which can be
rewritten as 3.25 + 0.75y ≤ 8.00. Subtracting 3.25 from both sides of the
inequality yields 0.75y ≤ 4.75. Dividing both sides of this inequality by
0.75 yields y ≤ 6.33. Therefore, the maximum number of whole oranges
Lynne can buy is 6.
419

PART 4 | Eight Official Practice Tests with Answer Explanations

QUESTION 32

The correct answer is 146. According to the triangle sum theorem,
the sum of the measures of the three angles of a triangle is 180°.
This triangle is made up of angles with measures of a°, b°, and c°.
Therefore, a + b + c = 180. Substituting 34 for a yields 34 + b + c = 180.
Subtracting 34 from each side of the equation yields b + c = 146.

QUESTION 33

The correct answer is 2500. The mean number of the list is found by
dividing the sum of all the numbers in the list by the count of numbers
in the list. It’s given that the mean of the five numbers in this list is
700 + 1200 + 1600 + 2000 + x
1600; therefore, ​  ___ = 1600. Multiplying both
5
sides of this equation by 5 gives 700 + 1200 + 1600 + 2000 + x = 8000.
The left-hand side of this equation can be rewritten as 5500 + x = 8000.
Subtracting 5500 from both sides of this equation gives x = 2500.

QUESTION 34

The correct answer is 34. Substituting the values y = 17 and x = a
17
into the equation y = mx yields 17 = ma. Solving for a gives a = _
m.
17
This can be substituted for a in x = 2a, which yields x = 2 ​  _
m ​  , or
34
34
34
_
_
x=_
m . Substituting x = m into the equation y = mx yields y = m ​  m ​  .
This equation can be rewritten as y = 34.

( )

( )

QUESTION 35

5
The correct answer is — . Applying the distributive property of
2
multiplication on the left-hand side of a(x + b ) = 4x + 10 yields
ax + ab = 4x + 10. If a(x + b ) = 4x + 10 has infinitely many solutions,
then ax + ab = 4x + 10 must be true for all values of x. It follows that
ax = 4x and ab = 10. Since ax = 4x, it follows that a = 4. Substituting
4 for a in ab = 10 yields 4b = 10. Dividing both sides of 4b = 10 by
5
10
4 yields b = _ ​, which simplifies to ​  _. Eit her 5/2 or 2.5 may be entered
4
2
as the correct answer.

QUESTION 36

25
The correct answer is ​  — ​. If a line intersects a parabola at a point,
4
the coordinates of the intersection point must satisfy the equation of
the line and the equation of the parabola. Since the equation of the
line is y = c, where c is a constant, the y-coordinate of the intersection
point must be c. It follows then that substituting c for y in the equation
for the parabola will result in another true equation: c = −x 2 + 5x.
Subtracting c from both sides of c = −x 2 + 5x and then dividing both
sides by −1 yields 0 = x 2 − 5x + c. The solution to this quadratic
equation would give the x-coordinate(s) of the point(s) of intersection.

420

Answer Explanations | SAT Practice Test #10

Since it’s given that the line and parabola intersect at exactly one point,
the equation 0 = x 2 − 5x + c has exactly one solution. A quadratic
equation in the form 0 = ax 2 + bx + c has exactly one solution when
its discriminant b 2 − 4ac is equal to 0. In the equation 0 = x 2 − 5x + c,
a = 1, b = −5, and c = c. Therefore, (−5)2 − 4(1)(c ) = 0, or 25 − 4c = 0.
Subtracting 25 from both sides of 25 − 4c = 0 and then dividing both
25
sides by −4 yields c = _. Therefore, if the line y = c intersects the
4
25
parabola defined by y = −x 2 + 5x at exactly one point, then c = _ ​
4
Either 25/4 or 6.25 may be entered as the correct answer.

QUESTION 37

The correct answer is 293. It’s given that a peregrine falcon’s
maximum speed while diving is 200 miles per hour and that
1 mile = 5280 feet. Therefore, a peregrine falcon’s maximum speed
feet
200 miles 5280
while diving is ​  _
 ​  ​​ ​  _
 ​  = 1,056,000 feet per hour.
1 hour
1 mile
There are 60 minutes in 1 hour and 60 seconds in each minute, so there
are (60)(60) = 3600 seconds in 1 hour. A peregrine falcon’s maximum
1,056,000 feet __
1 hour
speed while diving is therefore ​  __
 ​  ​​ ​ 
 ​  ​, which
1 hour
3600 seconds
is approximately 293.33 feet per second. To the nearest whole number,
this is 293 feet per second.

(

)(

)

(

)(

)

QUESTION 38

The correct answer is 9. If x is the number of hours it will take the
falcon to dive 0.5 mile, then the speed of 200 miles per hour can be used
mile
200 miles 0.5
 ​ = ​  _ . This proportion
to create the proportion _
1 hour
x hours
0.5 mile
_
can be rewritten as x hours =
, which gives x = 0.0025.
miles
200 _
hour
There are 60 minutes in 1 hour and 60 seconds in each minute, so there
are (60)(60) = 3600 seconds in one hour. Therefore, 0.0025 hour is
3600 seconds
 ​  = 9 seconds.
equivalent to (0.0025 hour) ​  __
1 hour

(

)

421

THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.

