                     Answer Explanations
SAT Practice Test #3 
Section 1: Reading Test 
QUESTION 1 
Choice B is the best answer.
 In the passage, Lady Carlotta is 
approached by the ﬁimposingly attired ladyﬂ Mrs. Quabarl while 

standing at a train station (lines 32-35). Mrs. Quabarl assumes Lady 

Carlotta is her new nanny, Miss Hope: ﬁYou must be Miss Hope, the 

governess I™ve come to meetﬂ (lines 36-37). Lady Carlotta does not 

correct Mrs. Quabarl™s mistake and replies, ﬁVery well, if I must I mustﬂ 

(line 39). Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because the passage is not about a 
woman weighing a job choice, seeking revenge on an acquaintance, or 
disliking her new employer. 
QUESTION 2 
Choice C is the best answer.
 In lines 1-3, the narrator states that Lady 

Carlotta ﬁstepped out on to the platform of the small wayside station 

and took a turn or two up and down its uninteresting lengthﬂ in order 

to ﬁkill time.ﬂ In this context, Lady Carlotta was taking a ﬁturn,ﬂ or a 

short walk, along the platform while waiting for the train to leave the 

station. 
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because in this context ﬁturnﬂ does 
not mean slight movement, change in rotation, or course correction. 
While Lady Carlotta may have had to rotate her body while moving 

across the station, ﬁtook a turnﬂ implies that Lady Carlotta took a short 

walk along the platform™s length. 
QUESTION 3 
Choice A is the best answer.
 In lines 10-14, the narrator states that 

some of Lady Carlotta™s acquaintances would often admonish, or 

criticize, Lady Carlotta for meddling in or openly expressing her 


 © 201 The College Board. College Board and SAT are registered trademarks of the College Board. 

                    Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because the narrator does not 
suggest that other people viewed Lady Carlotta as tactful, ambitious, 

or unfriendly. 
QUESTION 4 
Choice A is the best answer.
 In lines 10-14, the narrator states that 

people often criticized Lady Carlotta and suggested that she not 

 The fact that people often were critical of Lady Carlotta™s behavior 

provides evidence that Lady Carlotta was outspoken. 
Choices B, C, and D do not provide the best evidence that Lady 

Carlotta was outspoken. Choices B, C, and D mention Lady Carlotta, 

but do not specify how others view her. 
QUESTION 5 
Choice C is the best answer.
 Lines 4-10 establish that Lady Carlotta 

intervened on the part of a struggling horse, the kind of behavior for 

which, lines 10-14 indicate, she received ﬁplentiful admonitionﬂ from 

ﬁcertain of her acquaintances,ﬂ who believed that she should mind her 

own business. Lines 14-22 indicate that Lady Carlotta had ﬁonly once . . . 

put the doctrine of non-interference into practice,ﬂ and that was when 

ﬁone of its most eloquent exponentsﬂ had been ﬁbesieged for nearly 

three hours in a small and extremely uncomfortable may-tree by an 

angry boar-pigﬂ while Lady Carlotta blithely ignored the other woman™s 

hypocritical pleas for interference. This incident provides insight into 

Lady Carlotta™s character and also evokes humor through language choice 

(e.g., the droll understatement of ﬁit is to be feared that [Lady Carlotta] lost 

the friendship of the ultimately rescued ladyﬂ; lines 22-23) and the sense 

that, narratively speaking, justice has been served. 
Choice A is incorrect because nothing about the incident suggests 
deception on Lady Carlotta™s part. Choice B is incorrect because 

there is nothing subtle about Lady Carlotta leaving another woman 

stuck in a tree for nearly three hours. Moreover, the passage does not 

suggest that this was an act of cruelty on Lady Carlotta™s part; rather, 


 woman stuck in a tree exactly what the woman had so often asked for: 

noninterference. Choice D is incorrect because the passage indicates 

that Lady Carlotta was acting consistently with her beliefs and only 

invoked the doctrine to teach a hypocritical person a lesson. 
QUESTION 6 
Choice A is the best answer. 
The narrator explains that Mrs. Quabarl 
told Lady Carlotta about the ﬁnature of the chargeﬂ when she gave Lady 

Carlotta details about the Quabarl children (line 53-61). Since Lady 

Carlotta is pretending to be a governess, the term ﬁchargeﬂ refers to her 

responsibilities, or job duties, when caring for the Quabarl children. 

                       ANSWER EXPLANATIONS

 Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because in this context ﬁchargeﬂ 
does not mean attack, fee, or expense. 
QUESTION 7 
Choice A is the best answer.
 Lady Carlotta learns about Mrs. Quabarl™s 

children Claude, Wilfrid, and Irene (lines 53-58). The narrator then 

describes Mrs. Quabarl™s child Viola as ﬁsomething or other else of a 

mould equally commonplace among children of that class and type in 

the twentieth centuryﬂ (lines 58-61). This statement about Viola implies 

that all of the Quabarl children have skills typical, or ﬁof a mould 

equally commonplace,ﬂ to other peers in their social class. 
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because the narrator does not 

indicate that all of the Quabarl children are unusually creative and 

intelligent, hostile to the idea of having a governess, or more educated 

than their peers. 
QUESTION 8 
Choice B is the best answer.
 In lines 62-69, Mrs. Quabarl explains 

to Lady Carlotta that she wants her children to actively participate in 

their education, and that Lady Carlotta should not create lessons that 


 Mrs. Quabarl emphasizes an education centered on active engagement 

when she states that her children should ﬁnot only be TAUGHT . . . but 

INTERESTED in what they learn.ﬂ 
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because the narrator does not 

suggest that Mrs. Quabarl favors an education that emphasizes 

traditional values, artistic experimentation, or factual retention. 
QUESTION 9 
Choice B is the best answer.
 In lines 77-82, the narrator describes 


 domineering, but easily ﬁcowed and apologeticﬂ when someone 

 Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because the narrator does not 

 QUESTION 10 
Choice D is the best answer.
 In lines 77-82, the narrator provides 

evidence that Mrs. Quabarl appears imposing, or autocratic, but is 

 

 are not seriously opposed. The least show of unexpected resistance 

goes a long way towards rendering them cowed and apologetic.ﬂ 

                        Choices A, B, and C do not provide the best evidence that Mrs. Quabarl 

 because they present Mrs. Quabarl™s opinions on railway companies 
and education, and choice C is incorrect because it focuses on Lady 

Carlotta, not Mrs. Quabarl. 
QUESTION 11 
Choice A is the best answer.
 While the author predominantly 

supports the use of public transportation, in the third paragraph he 

recognizes some limitations to the public transportation system: it 

is a ﬁdepressing  experienceﬂ (lines 25-26) and ﬁunderfunded, ill-

maintained, and ill-plannedﬂ (line 31). 
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because the third paragraph does 

 provide an overview of a problem, or advocate ending the use of public 

transportation. 
QUESTION 12 
Choice C is the best answer.
 The author notes that in North America 

ﬁhopping in a car almost always gets you to your destination more 

quicklyﬂ (lines 32-34). This statement suggests that speed is one 

advantage to driving in North America. 
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because the author does not cite 

environmental impact, convenience, or cost as advantages of driving in 

North America. 
QUESTION 13 
Choice D is the best answer.
 In lines 32-34, the author provides 

evidence that speed is one advantage to driving in North America, 

because driving ﬁalmost always gets you to your destination more 

quickly.ﬂ 
Choices A, B, and C do not provide the best evidence that speed is 

one advantage to driving in North America. Choices A and B are 

 transportation. Choice C is incorrect because although these lines 

mention North America, they focus on the disadvantages of public 

transportation. 
QUESTION 14 
Choice B is the best answer.
 The author argues in the fourth 

paragraph that public transportation ﬁcan be faster, more comfortable, 

and cheaper than the private automobileﬂ (lines 36-37) and provides 

examples of fast and convenient public transportation systems. 
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because they focus on points made 

in the fourth paragraph rather than the paragraph™s central idea. 

                         ANSWER EXPLANATIONS

 QUESTION 15 
Choice B is the best answer.
 In lines 35-37, the author provides 
evidence that some public transportation systems are superior 

to driving, because public transportation ﬁcan be faster, more 

comfortable, and cheaper than the private automobile.ﬂ 
Choices A, C, and D do not provide the best evidence that some public 

transportation systems are superior to driving, as they highlight points 

made in the fourth paragraph rather than the paragraph™s central idea. 
QUESTION 16 
Choice C is the best answer.
 In the last paragraph, the author explains 

the trend that people who became adults around the end of the 

twentieth century are more willing to use public transportation than 

people from older generations. The author notes, ﬁIf you credit the 

demographers, this transit trend has legsﬂ (lines 58-59). In this context, 

ﬁcreditﬂ means to believe the demographers™ claims about the trend. 
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because in this context, ﬁcreditﬂ does 

not mean endow, attribute, or honor. 
QUESTION 17 
Choice B is the best answer.
 In lines 59-63, the author explains the 

trend of people who became adults around the end of the twentieth 

century ﬁtend[ing] to favor cities over suburbs.ﬂ In this context, these 

adults ﬁfavor,ﬂ or prefer, cities over suburbs. 
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because in this context ﬁfavorﬂ does 

not mean indulge, resemble, or serve. 
QUESTION 18 
Choice B is the best answer.
 In lines 63-67, the author explains 

that while riding on public transportation, people can use personal 

electronic devices, such as ﬁiPads, MP3 players, Kindles, and 

smartphones.ﬂ 
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because they do not show that 

public transportation is compatible with the use of personal electronic 

devices. 
QUESTION 19 
Choice A is the best answer.
 Figure 1 shows that 10.7% of 

public transportation passengers are students and 6.7% of public 

transportation passengers are retirees. Thus, more students than 

retirees use public transportation. 

 employed than unemployed people use public transportation and that 

more employed people than homemakers use public transportation. 

              
 
 transportation passengers by their primary occupation. 
QUESTION 20 
Choice A is the best answer.
 Figure 1 shows that 72% of public 

 indicates that 59.1% of public transportation trips are for ﬁwork.ﬂ It 

 passengers take public transportation to their place of employment. 

 indicate that public transportation passengers primarily use the system 

to run errands, use their own car on weekends, or are planning to 

purchase a car. 
QUESTION 21 
Choice D is the best answer.
 The author explains that Ken Dial 

 

 the unusual way Chukars use their ﬁ‚wings and legs cooperatively™ﬂ 

to scale hay bales (lines 38-43), and he created ﬁa series of ingenious 

experimentsﬂ (line 46) to study this observation. After his additional 

experiments, Dial determined that these baby birds angle ﬁtheir wings 

 

 the sequence of events in the passage. 
QUESTION 22 
Choice A is the best answer.
 In lines 6-9, the author explains that 

Dial was ﬁchallenged,ﬂ or dared, by graduate students to develop ﬁnew 

 theory). 
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because in this context ﬁchallengedﬂ 

does not mean required, disputed with, or competed with. 
QUESTION 23 
Choice A is the best answer.
 The author explains that Dial created his 

initial experiment to try and create ﬁnew data on the age-old ground
-up-tree-down debate,ﬂ and that he looked for ﬁcluesﬂ in ﬁhow baby 

 
                    ANSWER EXPLANATIONS

 the passage explains the ﬁage-old ground-up-tree down debateﬂ and 


 paragraph of the passage discusses WAIR in an evolutionary context. 
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because they do not identify Dial™s 
central assumption in setting up his research. 
QUESTION 24 
Choice B is the best answer.
 In lines 6-11, the author provides 

evidence that Dial™s central assumption in setting up his research is 

 

 to ﬁcome up with new data on the age-old ground-up-tree-down 

debate.ﬂ 
Choices A, C, and D do not provide the best evidence that Dial™s central 

 

 Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because they focus on Dial™s 

experiment and his observations on ground birds. 
QUESTION 25 
Choice C is the best answer.
 When a rancher observed Dial™s 

laboratory setup, he was ﬁincredulousﬂ that the Chukars were living on 

the ground, and he advised Dial to give the birds ﬁsomething to climb 

onﬂ (lines 16-23). This ﬁkey piece of adviceﬂ (line 14) led Dial to add 

hay bales to his laboratory. Dial later noticed that the Chukars were 

using their legs and wings to scale the hay bales, and this observation 

became the focal point of his research. 
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because the incident with the local 

rancher did not serve to reveal Dial™s motivation for creating the 

 

 QUESTION 26 
Choice C is the best answer.
 The author explains that Dial™s ﬁaha 

momentﬂ came when he determined the Chukars used ﬁtheir legs 

and wings cooperativelyﬂ to scale the hay bales (lines 40-42). Dial 

then created additional experiments to study how the birds dealt with 

 textured ramps tilted at increasing anglesﬂ (lines 46-48). 
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because Dial™s ﬁaha momentﬂ was 

 

 researchers. 

                   QUESTION 27 
Choice B is the best answer.
 Dial observed that as the Chukars raced 

 
 against the rampﬂ (lines 49-53). Dial determined that the position of 

 ramps. 
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because the passage does not 

indicate that the Chukars™ speed, alternation of wing and foot 

movement, or continual hopping motions facilitated their traction on 

steep ramps. 
QUESTION 28 
Choice B is the best answer.
 In lines 61-63, the author explains that 

 running, and went on to document it in a wide range of species.ﬂ In 

this context, Dial ﬁdocumented,ﬂ or recorded, the existence of WAIR in 

numerous bird species. 
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because in this context, ﬁdocumentﬂ 

does not mean to portray, publish, or process. 
QUESTION 29 
Choice D is the best answer.
 In lines 70-74, the author explains that 

 assisted incline running. Since Chukars, a ground bird, use WAIR to 

help scale steep inclines, it can be reasonably inferred that gliding 

animals do not use WAIR to aid in climbing slopes. 
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because the passage does not 

 locomotion, or their feeding habits. 
QUESTION 30 
Choice D is the best answer.
 In lines 73-75, the author provides 

 don™t do.ﬂ 
Choices A, B, and C do not provide the best evidence that gliding 

 choices do not contain information about gliding animals. 
QUESTION 31 
Choice B is the best answer.
 In lines 21-24, the authors of Passage 1 

state society™s ﬁcommon happinessﬂ is dependent on women never 

becoming involved in politics. In this context, the authors of Passage 1 

are suggesting that all members of society can have a ﬁcommon,ﬂ or 

shared, happiness. 

                       ANSWER EXPLANATIONS

 Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because in this context, ﬁcommonﬂ 
does not mean average, coarse, or similar. 
QUESTION 32 
Choice C is the best answer.
 In lines 25-30, the authors of Passage 1 

state that women should seek ﬁgentle occupations and the cares of 

 unpleasant, or ﬁonerous,ﬂ tasks. 
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because the authors of Passage 1 

do not suggest that running a household and raising children are 

rewarding for both sexes, yield less value for society, or require 

professional or political skills. 
QUESTION 33 
Choice C is the best answer.
 In lines 25-30, the authors of Passage 1 

provide evidence that women should run households and raise children 

because these roles do not require ﬁstrenuous habits and onerous 

duties.ﬂ 
Choices A, B, and D do not provide the best evidence that running 

a household and raising children entail very few activities that are 

 

 QUESTION 34 
Choice D is the best answer.
 In lines 41-46, Wollstonecraft argues that 

if women do not receive an education ﬁto become the companion of 

man,ﬂ or one that is comparable to men™s education, then society will 

not progress in ﬁknowledge and virtue.ﬂ 
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because Wollstonecraft does not 

suggest that society can progress only if women have happiness and 

 power. 
QUESTION 35 
Choice C is the best answer.
 Wollstonecraft argues that women 

should be granted an education comparable to men™s so that truth is 

ﬁcommon to allﬂ (lines 41-46). Wollstonecraft states that education 

will ﬁstrengthen [women™s] reason till she comprehend her dutyﬂ 

(lines 49-50). In this context, Wollstonecraft is arguing that education 

will improve women™s ﬁreason,ﬂ or intellect, and allow women to 

consider their role in society. 
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because in this context ﬁreasonﬂ 

does not mean motive, sanity, or explanation. 

                             QUESTION 36 
Choice A is the best answer.
 In lines 72-78, Wollstonecraft argues that 
the laws passed by society™s leaders allow men to ﬁcontend for their 

freedomﬂ but serve to ﬁsubjugate women.ﬂ In this context, ﬁsubjugateﬂ 

means to control. Wollstonecraft is arguing that society™s leaders grant 

men freedoms that are denied to women. 
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because Wollstonecraft does not 

claim that society™s leaders have granted freedoms that created a 

general reduction in individual virtue, caused arguments about 

happiness, or ensured equality for all people. 
QUESTION 37 
Choice D is the best answer.
 In lines 72-75, Wollstonecraft provides 

evidence that society™s leaders grant freedoms that privilege men. 

She argues that while society™s leaders believe they ﬁare acting in 

the manner best calculated to promote [women™s] happiness,ﬂ their 

decisions don™t allow women to ﬁcontend for their freedom.ﬂ 
Choices A, B, and C do not provide the best evidence that society™s 

leaders grant freedoms that privilege men over women. 
QUESTION 38 
Choice C is the best answer.
 Wollstonecraft cites the statement made 

by the authors of Passage 1 that excluding women from political 

participation is ﬁaccording to abstract principles . . . impossible to 

explainﬂ (lines 61-65). Wollstonecraft then states that if the authors of 

Passage 1 can discuss ﬁthe abstract rights of manﬂ they should be able 

to discuss the abstract rights of women (lines 66-69). In these lines, 

 reasoning presented by the authors of Passage 1. 
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because Wollstonecraft does not refer 

to the statement made in Passage 1 to call into question the authors™ 

 own government (sentence one of Passage 1), or validate the authors™ 

conclusions on gender roles. 
QUESTION 39 
Choice A is the best answer.
 The authors of Passage 1 argue that 

while restricting women™s freedoms may be ﬁimpossible to explainﬂ 

(line 7), this restriction is necessary for society™s overall happiness 

(lines 13-17). Wollstonecraft, however, strongly challenges this 

argument, asking the authors of Passage 1, ﬁWho made man the 

exclusive judgeﬂ of which freedoms are granted to women, and likening 

society™s male leaders to tyrants as they deny women their ﬁcivil and 

political rightsﬂ and leave them ﬁgroping in the darkﬂ (lines 78-88). 
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because they do not characterize the 

overall relationship between Passage 1 and Passage 2. 

                         ANSWER EXPLANATIONS

 QUESTION 40 
Choice D is the best answer.
 The authors of Passage 1 admit that 
women are ﬁexcluded by the other half [men] from any participation in 

governmentﬂ (lines 1-2), and Wollstonecraft states that society™s male 

leaders create laws that deny women ﬁcivil and political rightsﬂ (line 86). 
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because the authors of both 

passages would not agree that women had the same preferences as 

men, required a good education, or were as happy as men. 
QUESTION 41 
Choice A is the best answer.

 paragraph of Passage 2 that society™s male leaders are like ﬁtyrantsﬂ 

that deny women ﬁcivil and political rightsﬂ (lines 81-88). The authors 

of Passage 1 would most likely argue that allowing women these 

rights would be ﬁa reversal of [society™s] primary destiniesﬂ as society™s 

leaders should only seek women™s interests as they pertain to the 

ﬁwishes of nature,ﬂ such as women™s role as mothers (lines 18-30). 

The authors of Passage 1 clarify that ﬁnatureﬂ created two sexes for a 

particular reason, so while men can exercise civil and political rights, 

women are not naturally suited to these activities (lines 30-36). 
Choices B and C are incorrect because they are not supported by 

information in Passage 1. Choice D is incorrect because the authors of 

Passage 1 do not mention ﬁnatural law,ﬂ only the ﬁwishes of nature.ﬂ 
QUESTION 42 
Choice C is the best answer.
 When discussing problems with bee 

colonies, the authors use phrases like ﬁwe suspectﬂ (line 19) and ﬁwe 

 colonies™ susceptibility to mite infestations. The use of ﬁcan,ﬂ ﬁmay,ﬂ 

and ﬁcouldﬂ creates a tentative tone and provides further evidence that 

the authors believe, but are not certain, that their hypothesis is correct. 
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because the authors™ use of ﬁcan,ﬂ 

ﬁmay,ﬂ and ﬁcouldﬂ does not create an optimistic, dubious, or critical 

tone. QUESTION 43 
Choice C is the best answer.
 In lines 24-28, the authors hypothesize 

that bee colonies will be susceptible to mite infestations if they do not 

occasionally feed on pyrethrum producing plants. In lines 42-46, they 

suggest creating a trial where a ﬁsmall number of commercial honey 

 test their hypothesis. 

                          Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because the authors do not 
hypothesize that honeybees™ exposure to both pyrethrums and mites 

will cause the honeybees to develop secondary infections, that 

beekeepers should increase their use of insecticides, or that humans 

are more susceptible to varroa mites. 
QUESTION 44 
Choice D is the best answer.
 In lines 24-28, the authors provide 

evidence that a bee colony may be more resistant to mite infections 

if the bees eat pyrethrums because this diet may help prevent bees 

 lines 42-50, the authors suggest testing this hypothesis in a trial on 

honeybees. 
Choices A, B, and C do not describe any of the authors™ hypotheses. 
QUESTION 45 
Choice D is the best answer.
 The authors explain that when 

 mite infections, they may ﬁfurther weakenﬂ bees that are 

 Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because the authors do not suggest 

that beekeepers™ use of commercially produced insecticides increases 

mite populations, kills bacteria, or destroys bees™ primary food source. 
QUESTION 46 
Choice C is the best answer.
 In lines 31-35, the authors provide 

evidence that beekeepers™ use of commercially produced insecticides 

may cause further harm to ﬁimmunocompromised or nutritionally 

 Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because they do not provide the best 

evidence that beekeepers™ use of commercially produced insecticides 

may be harmful to bees; choices A, B, and D focus on mite infestations™ 

impact on honeybees. 
QUESTION 47 
Choice B is the best answer.
 In lines 31-35, the authors argue that 

beekeepers™ use of insecticides to control mite infestations may be 

harmful to some bees. The authors then state, ﬁWe further postulate 

that the proper dosage necessary to prevent mite infestation may 

be better left to the beesﬂ (lines 35-37). In this context, the authors 

ﬁpostulate,ﬂ or put forth the idea that the bees may naturally control 

mite infestations better than insecticides. 
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because in this context, ﬁpostulateﬂ 

does not mean to make an unfounded assumption, question a belief or 

 
                       ANSWER EXPLANATIONS

 QUESTION 48 
Choice B is the best answer.
 In the fourth paragraph the authors 
propose a trial to study if honeybees™ consumption of pyrethrum 

producing plants helps the honeybees defend against mite infestations. 

 both pyrethrum producing plants and ﬁa typical bee food source 

 susceptibility to mite infestations. 
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because the main purpose of the 

fourth paragraph is not to summarize the results of an experiment, 

provide a comparative nutritional analysis, or predict an outcome of an 
 QUESTION 49 
Choice A is the best answer.
 In lines 43-45, the authors propose a 

 producing plants, as well as a typical bee food source such as clover.ﬂ 

Since the authors contrast the ﬁpyrethrum producing plantsﬂ with 

clover, a ﬁtypical bee food source,ﬂ it can be assumed that clover does 

not produce pyrethrums. 
Choice B is incorrect because it is stated in the passage. Choices C 

and D are incorrect because they are not assumptions made by the 

authors. 
QUESTION 50 
Choice B is the best answer.
 The table shows that 77 percent of the 

honeybee colonies with colony collapse disorder were infected by all 

four pathogens. 
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because they do not identify the 

percent of honeybee colonies with colony collapse disorder that were 

infected by all four pathogens as based on data in the table. 
QUESTION 51 
Choice D is the best answer.
 The table shows that 81 percent of 

 pathogen 

. Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because they do not identify the 

pathogen that infected the highest percentage of honeybee colonies 

without colony collapse disorder as based on data in the table. 
QUESTION 52 
Choice D is the best answer.
 The table discusses pathogen occurrence 

in honeybee colonies, but it includes no information as to whether 

these honeybees were infected with mites. Because the table does not 

                   suggest mites infested the honeybee colonies, no conclusions can be 
made as to whether mites increased the honeybees™ ﬁsusceptibility to 

secondary infection with fungi, bacteria or virusesﬂ (lines 4-5). 
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because the table provides no 

information about whether these honeybees were infected with mites. 
Section 2: Writing and Language Test 
QUESTION 1 
Choice A is the best answer
 because by providing the comparative 

adjective ﬁhealthierﬂ and the word ﬁmoreﬂ to make ﬁproductiveﬂ 

comparative, it creates a parallel structure within the list that begins 

with ﬁhappier.ﬂ 
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because none creates a parallel 

structure within the list of qualities. 
QUESTION 2 
Choice B is the best answer.
 The ways in which exposure to natural 

 Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because none introduces the topic 

discussed in the remainder of the passage. 
QUESTION 3 
Choice C is the best answer.
 It accurately notes that the proposed 

 circadian rhythms and the explanation of the term. 
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because each misinterprets the 

relationship between the proposed additional text and the ideas in the 

paragraph. 
QUESTION 4 
Choice C is the best answer.
 It provides the correct possessive 

construction for ﬁbody,ﬂ which must be a singular noun when 

discussed in general terms as in this sentence. Choice C also provides 

the correct plural construction for ﬁclocks.ﬂ 
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because each applies either a 

possessive or a plural construction in a place where it doesn™t belong. 
QUESTION 5 
Choice A is the best answer.
 The singular verb ﬁisﬂ agrees with the 

singular noun ﬁabsenteeism.ﬂ 
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because each provides a verb 

that either fails to agree with the singular subject ﬁabsenteeismﬂ or 

introduces redundancy. 

                 ANSWER EXPLANATIONS

 QUESTION 6 
Choice B is the best answer.
 It contains a direct reference to 
productivity, the topic introduced in the previous sentence. 
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because none directly addresses 

employee productivity, the primary subject of the previous sentence. 
QUESTION 7 
Choice A is the best answer.
 It opens with a reference to lowered 

worker productivity, creating a transition from the previous paragraph, 

 an additional disadvantage. 


 an adequate transition from the previous paragraph: Each awkwardly 

inserts the issue of lower worker productivity into a statement about 

 QUESTION 8 
Choice D is the best answer.
 The word ﬁannualﬂ is adequate to 

communicate that the savings occurred every year. 
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because each proposes an option 

that would result in a redundancy with ﬁannual.ﬂ 
QUESTION 9 
Choice C is the best answer.
 It provides a transitional adverb that 

accurately communicates that this sentence describes an option that 

companies could choose (ﬁlight tubesﬂ) instead of the option described 

in the previous sentence (ﬁfull-pane windowsﬂ). 
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because each proposes a transitional 

 sentence and the one preceding it. 
QUESTION 10 
Choice C is the best answer.
 It provides the correct relative pronoun to 

correspond with the plural referent ﬁlight tubesﬂ and the correct verb to 

 
 

 QUESTION 11 
Choice B is the best answer.
 The preposition ﬁofﬂ idiomatically follows 

the noun ﬁmeans,ﬂ particularly as a way to connect it to another noun 

or verb. 
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because each results in nonstandard 

phrasing with ﬁmeans.ﬂ 

                    QUESTION 12 
Choice A is the best answer.

 ﬁthemselvesﬂ corresponds with the plural noun ﬁsettlers.ﬂ 
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because each provides either a 
nonstandard phrase or a singular pronoun that does not correspond 

with ﬁsettlers.ﬂ 
QUESTION 13 
Choice C is the best answer.
 It creates a transition from the poor food 

quality mentioned in the previous sentence to the information about 

Harvey in the remainder of the sentence. 

 the previous sentence or a detail that corresponds precisely with the 

information in the remainder of the sentence. 
QUESTION 14 
Choice D is the best answer.
 It correctly provides a comma to close 

the modifying clause ﬁan English-born entrepreneur,ﬂ which opens 

with a comma. 
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because each proposes punctuation 

that creates an inappropriately strong separation between the subject 

ﬁFred Harveyﬂ and the verb ﬁdecided.ﬂ 
QUESTION 15 
Choice B is the best answer.
 It provides the plural verb and plural 

possessive pronoun that grammatically correspond to the plural 

referent ﬁHarvey Houses.ﬂ 
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because each either fails to provide a 

verb that corresponds with the plural referent ﬁHarvey Housesﬂ or fails 

to provide the appropriate possessive pronoun. 
QUESTION 16 
Choice C is the best answer.
 It accurately echoes an earlier 

characterization of the food as being of ﬁterrible quality,ﬂ while 

maintaining the established tone of the passage. 
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect either because the word is less 

formal than the established tone of the passage (ﬁickyﬂ) or because it 

illogically attributes agency to food (ﬁsinister,ﬂ ﬁsurlyﬂ). 
QUESTION 17 
Choice C is the best answer.
 It accurately interprets ﬁnot content 

to follow conventional business practicesﬂ as logically introducing 

the new practice of ﬁemploying womenﬂ described in the following 

sentences. 

             ANSWER EXPLANATIONS

 Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because none recognizes why the 
sentence is relevant to this particular location in the passage. 
QUESTION 18 
Choice B is the best answer.
 It is concise and free of redundancies. 
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because each pairs ﬁoverwhelmingﬂ 

and ﬁtremendous,ﬂ adjectives so close in meaning that together they 

present a redundancy. 
QUESTION 19 
Choice D is the best answer.
 It contains the pronoun ﬁthey,ﬂ a 

necessary reference to ﬁsuch regulationsﬂ in the previous clause. 
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because each lacks a necessary 

subject, such as a pronoun or noun. 
QUESTION 20 
Choice C is the best answer.

 restaurants™ female employees, the subject of the previous sentence. 
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because none logically builds upon 

the sentence that precedes it. 
QUESTION 21 
Choice D is the best answer.
 It provides punctuation that indicates 

 Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because each uses the punctuation 

for a dependent clause (ﬁLiving independently and demonstrating an 

intense work ethicﬂ) as if it were an independent clause. 
QUESTION 22 
Choice A is the best answer.
 It recognizes that the new information 

supports the previous sentence™s claim that ﬁthe Harvey Girls became 

known as a transformative force.ﬂ 
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because each misinterprets the 

relationship between the proposed text and the passage. 
QUESTION 23 
Choice A is the best answer.

 

 subject and allows the ideas in the sentence to progress logically. 
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because each displays awkward or 

 
               QUESTION 24 
Choice D is the best answer.
 Only the comma is necessary to separate 

 Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because each creates a comma splice 
and/or adds unnecessary words. 
QUESTION 25 
Choice B is the best answer.

 describes fresh apples. 
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because each proposes an adjective 

that does not describe a plausible fruit texture. 
QUESTION 26 
Choice A is the best answer.
 The plural possessive pronoun ﬁtheirﬂ 

corresponds with the plural referent ﬁapples.ﬂ 
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because none provides a pronoun 

that is both possessive and plural. 
QUESTION 27 
Choice D is the best answer.
 It provides the pronoun ﬁwho,ﬂ 

 appropriately begins the relative clause. 
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because each contains a pronoun 

that either does not correspond with the human referent ﬁconsumersﬂ 

or does not correctly begin the relative clause. 
QUESTION 28 
Choice B is the best answer.
 It provides the present tense verb ﬁdo,ﬂ 

which corresponds to the present tense established earlier in the 

sentence. 
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because each contains a verb that 

deviates from the simple present tense established in the sentence. 
QUESTION 29 
Choice B is the best answer.
 It provides a colon to appropriately 

introduce the clause that follows, an elaboration on the preceding 

claim that Bartlett pears are an example of fruit that ﬁdo not respond as 

well to 1-MCP treatment.ﬂ 
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because each either creates a comma 

splice or uses a transitional phrase (ﬁFor instanceﬂ) illogically. 

               ANSWER EXPLANATIONS

 QUESTION 30 
Choice B is the best answer.
 Sentence 4 begins with ﬁBut,ﬂ indicating 
a contrast with a previous idea, and goes on to mention that 1-MCP 

 

 scent production, so the most logical spot for sentence 4 is between 

these sentences. 
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because each proposes placing the 

sentence at a point where it would compromise the logical development 

of ideas in the paragraph. 
QUESTION 31 
Choice D is the best answer.

 

 when untreated apples are left in the open air for three weeks rather 

than placed immediately into a controlled atmosphere. 
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because each presents an inaccurate 

interpretation of the data in the graph. 
QUESTION 32 
Choice B is the best answer.
 It accurately interprets the data as 

 are treated with 1-MCP: both bars representing 1-MCP treatment are 

near the 50% line. 
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because each proposes an inaccurate 

interpretation of the data. 
QUESTION 33 
Choice C is the best answer.
 It describes an action, weighing the 

relative values, that fruit sellers must take as a result of 1-MCP™s 

limitations. 

 the shortcomings of 1-MCP with any action on the part of fruit sellers. 
QUESTION 34 
Choice D is the best answer.
 It clearly communicates that the 

 Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because each fails to link the 

preceding dependent clause to an independent clause, resulting in an 

incomplete sentence. 

                 QUESTION 35 
Choice B is the best answer.
 It provides the necessary em dash to 
close the aside about artist C.M. Coolidge, which opens with an em 

dash. Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because each provides closing 

punctuation for the aside that does not correspond with the opening 

punctuation. 
QUESTION 36 
Choice C is the best answer.
 The plural verb ﬁportrayﬂ corresponds 

with the plural noun ﬁworks of art.ﬂ 
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because none provides the plural 

verb in the present tense that the sentence requires. 
QUESTION 37 
Choice D is the best answer.
 It names a ﬁmuseum in Russia,ﬂ which is 

the subject of the next paragraph. 
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because each provides an overly 


 follows. 
QUESTION 38 
Choice C is the best answer.
 It creates parallelism with the verb 

ﬁcould damageﬂ that appears earlier in the clause (ﬁrodents that could 

 Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because each presents a verb tense 

that is inconsistent with the sentence™s other present tense verb (ﬁcould 

damageﬂ) that shares ﬁmice, rats, and other rodentsﬂ as its subject. 
QUESTION 39 
Choice C is the best answer.
 Sentence 5, which discusses Peter the 

Great™s daughter continuing his tradition, most logically follows the 

sentence about Peter the Great. 
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because each presents a placement 

that would compromise the logical development of the paragraph. 
QUESTION 40 
Choice B is the best answer.
 ﬁCommissionedﬂ describes the act of 

 Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because each provides a word that 

does not correspond logically with the context. 

                         ANSWER EXPLANATIONS

 QUESTION 41 
Choice D is the best answer.
 It provides punctuation that clearly 
places the noun phrase ﬁdigital artist Eldar Zakirovﬂ as an appositive 

identifying the person mentioned in the previous phrase, ﬁThe person 

chosen for this task.ﬂ 
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because each fails to open and close 

the uninterrupted appositive noun phrase ﬁdigital artist Eldar Zakirovﬂ 

with commas. 
QUESTION 42 
Choice A is the best answer.
 The phrase ﬁnoble individualsﬂ 

corresponds with the subsequent examples of portraits where the 

cats are depicted as ﬁaristocratic,ﬂ ﬁstately,ﬂ and like a ﬁtrusted royal 

advisor.ﬂ 
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because each provides a statement 

that does not logically connect to the examples that follow. 
QUESTION 43 
Choice D is the best answer.
 It accurately states that the information 

in the proposed additional sentence is not related to formal portraits of 

cats, the main topic of the paragraph. 
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because each fails to recognize 

that the proposed sentence interrupts the logical development of the 

paragraph. 
QUESTION 44 
Choice D is the best answer.
 The tone corresponds with that 

established in the passage, and the phrasing appropriately focuses 

on the cats™ contribution to protecting artwork rather than on simply 

killing rodents. 
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because none makes explicit the 

link between the cats™ hunting activities and the service to the museum. 
Section 3: Math Test Œ No Calculator 
QUESTION 1 
Choice C is correct.
 The painter™s fee is given by 
h, where 
 is the 
number of walls, 
 is a constant with units of dollars per square foot, 
 is the length of each wall in feet, and 
h is the height of each wall 
in feet. Examining this equation shows that 
 and h will be used to determine the area of each wall. The variable 
 is the number of walls, 
so  times the area of each wall will give the amount of area that will 
need to be painted. The only remaining variable is 
, which represents 

              
               
             
             
  
           
  
           
  
        
  
      
  
        
      
  
         
  
           
      
                
    
  
      
  
        
       
              
      
        
  
            
  
            
        
  
      
  
        
      
  
          
  
           _ _ 
_ _ _ 
_ the cost per square foot and is determined by the painter™s time and 
the price of paint. Therefore, 
 is the only factor that will change if the 
customer asks for a more expensive brand of paint. 
Choice A is incorrect because a more expensive brand of paint would 

not cause the height of each wall to change. Choice B is incorrect 

because a more expensive brand of paint would not cause the length of 

each wall to change. Choice D is incorrect because a more expensive 

brand of paint would not cause the number of walls to change. 
QUESTION 2 
Choice D is correct.
 Dividing each side of the equation 3
 = 18 by 3 gives 

 in the expression 6
 + 3 gives 6(6) + 3 = 39. 
Alternatively, the expression 6
 + 3 can be rewritten as 2(3
) + 3. Substituting 18 for 3
 in the expression 2(3
) + 3 yields 2(18) + 3, or 
36 + 3 = 39. Choice A is incorrect because 6 is the value of 
; however, the question 
asks for the value of the expression 6
 + 3. Choices B and C are 
incorrect because if 6
 + 3 were equal to either of these values, then it 
would not be possible for 3
 to be equal to 18, as stated in the question. 
QUESTION 3 
_  _ Choice D is correct.

 =  for any positive integers 
_2 3_ . It follows, therefore, that 

3 = 2. 

 _1  =  _
for any positive integer 
. 
 _1 _1 _1 _1 _1_2_12to the expression 
3 yields 
3 = ( 3 )_1 = 
6. Because 
6
3, 3 is not 

 _1 =  _
for 
any positive integer 

 __ 
_1_3 property of exponents to the expression 
 3 yields 
 3 = ( 3)2 = 
2. _3 _2_ Because 
2

3,  3 is not the correct answer. Choice C is incorrect. 
_1 _
 = for any positive integer 
. Applying this 

 3 3_1 3 _1 _1 _1 _1 _1_2_13 32 yields 
2 = ( 
2) = 
6. Because 
6
 , 2 is not the correct 
answer. 
QUESTION 4 
Choice B is correct.

 large as 
. This can be written as 2
 = 30. Choices A, C, and D are incorrect. These equations do not correctly 
relate the numbers and variables described in the stem. For example, 

the expression in choice C states that 30 is half as large as 
, not twice as large as 
. 
  
                
           
              
  
     ANSWER EXPLANATIONS

 QUESTION 5 
_5 _15Choice C is correct.
 Multiplying each side of  
= by ( + 20)
 + 20 gives 5(
 + 20) = 15. Using the distributive property to eliminate the 
parentheses yields 5
 + 100 = 15, and then subtracting 5
 from each 
side of the equation 5
 + 100 = 15
. Finally, dividing 
both sides of the equation 100 = 10
  by 10 gives 10 = 
. Therefore, the 
_ _10value of 
is = 2.55 
_Choice A is incorrect because it is the value of 
, not . Choices B and
5 D are incorrect and may be the result of errors in arithmetic operations 
on the given equation. 
QUESTION 6 
Choice C is correct.
 Multiplying each side of the equation 
2y
y
 equation 3
y
y
 sides of 6y
y
 
y
y
 gives 
y = 6. Finally, substituting 6 for 
y in 2y
 2 = 2. Therefore, the value of 
y Alternatively, adding the corresponding sides of 2
y
 3y
y
y Choices A and B are incorrect and may be the result of an arithmetic 

error when solving the system of equations. Choice D is incorrect and 


 + y instead of 
y. QUESTION 7 
Choice C is correct.
 If b is a factor of 
f (), then 
f (b) must equal 0. Based on the table, 
f (4) = 0. Therefore, 

f (). Choice A is incorrect because 
f 
 no information is given about the value of 
f (3), so 
 be a factor of 
f (). Choice D is incorrect because 
f 
 QUESTION 8 
Choice A is correct.
 The linear equation 
y =  + 4 is in slope-intercept 
form, and so the slope of the line is 
k. Since the line contains the 
point (, d ), the coordinates of this point satisfy the equation 
y =  + 4; therefore, 
d =  + 4. Solving this equation for the slope, 
k, gives 
d_k = . Choices B, C, and D are incorrect and may be the result of errors in 

substituting the coordinates of (
, d ) in y =  + 4 or of errors in solving 
for 
k in the resulting equation. 

      
     
      
     
     
      
      
      
                   
                QUESTION 9 
Choice A is correct.
 If a system of two linear equations has no 
solution, then the lines represented by the equations in the coordinate 

plane are parallel. The equation 
y = 4 can be rewritten as 
_ k _4 _ k y =  , where 
is the slope of the line, and the equation
33 3 
_4_7 _44y = 7 can be rewritten as 
y =  , where 
is the slope
55 5 
of the line. If two lines are parallel, then the slopes of the line are 
_4 _ k _12equal. Therefore, 
5 = 3, or k = . (Since the 
y-intercepts of the lines
5 _4 _7
  , the lines are parallel, not
35 identical.) Choices B, C, and D are incorrect and may be the result of a 
computational error when rewriting the equations or solving the 

equation representing the equality of the slopes for 
k. QUESTION 10 
Choice A is correct.
 Substituting 25 for 
y in the equation 
y = (2 gives 25 = 
(2. It follows that 

 -coordinates of the two points of intersection are 
 = 16 and  = 6, respectively. Since both points of intersection have a 
y-coordinate of 
25, it follows that the two points are (16, 25) and (6, 25). Since these 

points lie on the horizontal line 
y = 25, the distance between these 


 Alternatively, since a translation is a rigid motion, the distance 

between points 
 and B would be the same as the distance between 
the points of intersection of the line 
y = 25 and the parabola 
y = 2. 
 the two points, and thus the distance between 
 and B, is 10. Choices B, C, and D are incorrect and may be the result of an error in 

solving the quadratic equation that results when substituting 25 for 
y 
in the given quadratic equation. 
QUESTION 11 
Choice B is correct.
 Since the angles marked 
y° and u° are vertical 

angles, 
yu. Substituting y for 
u in the equation 
 + y = u +  gives 
 = . Since the angles marked 
 and z° are vertical angles, 
z. Therefore, by the transitive property, 
 = z, and so I must be true. The equation in II need not be true. For example, if 
 =  = z = t = 70 and y = u
 equal measure and the given condition 
 + y = u +  holds. But it is not 
true in this case that 
y is equal to . Therefore, II need not be true. 

 that 
 + y + z = 180. Similarly, 
 + u + t = 180, and so  + y + z =  + u + t. Subtracting the sides of the given equation 
 + y = u +  from the corresponding 
sides of  + y + z =  + u + t gives 
z = t. Therefore, III must be true. Since only I 
and III must be true, the correct answer is choice B. 

                      
        
    
     
       
   __ ANSWER EXPLANATIONS

 Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because each of these choices 
includes II, which need not be true. QUESTION 12 
Choice A is correct.
 The parabola with equation 
y = (  + 4) crosses the 

 the 
-coordinate of the vertex of the parabola is halfway between 
the 

-coordinate of the 
_vertex is  


y-coordinate of 
2 the 

 in y = (  + 4): y = (  + 4) =    Therefore, the value of 
d. Choice B is incorrect because the value of the constant term in the 

equation is not the 
y-coordinate of the vertex, unless there were no 
linear terms in the quadratic. Choice C is incorrect and may be the 


-coordinate of the vertex. Choice D 

 the quadratic equation is not the 
y-coordinate of the vertex. 
QUESTION 13 
Choice B is correct.
 Since 242 + 25
 
  242 + 25
 equation by 

2 + 16 242 + 25
2-term have to be equal on 

 = 24, or  Choices A, C, and D are incorrect and may be the result of either a 

conceptual misunderstanding or a computational error when trying to 

solve for the value of 
. QUESTION 14 
Choice A is correct.
 Dividing each side of the given equation by 3 gives 

the equivalent equation 
2 + 4 + 2 = 0. Then using the quadratic 
_ b ± b 2
 formula,  
with 
 = 1, b = 4, and  = 2, gives the solutions 
2 _ 2. Choices B, C, and D are incorrect and may be the result of errors when 

applying the quadratic formula. 
QUESTION 15 
Choice D is correct.
 If C is graphed against 
F, the slope of the line is 
_5equal to  degrees Celsius/degrees Fahrenheit, which means that for an 
9 _5increase of 1 degree Fahrenheit, the increase is   of 1 degree Celsius. 
9 Thus, statement I is true. This is the equivalent to saying that an increase 
_9of 1 degree Celsius is equal to an increase of   degrees Fahrenheit. 
5 
  
     
     
            
     
      
      
      
                         
            
     
      
    
             _9Since = 1.8, statement II is true. On the other hand, statement III is
5 _9 _5not true, since a temperature increase of degrees Fahrenheit, not
59 degree Fahrenheit, is equal to a temperature increase of 1 degree Celsius. 
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because each of these choices omits 
a true statement or includes a false statement. 
QUESTION 16 
The correct answer is either 1 or 2. 
The given equation can be rewritten 
as 53 + 4 = 0. Since the polynomial expression on the left has no 
constant term, it has 
 as a factor: 
(42 + 4) = 0. The expression in 
parentheses is a quadratic equation in 
2 that can be factored, giving 
(2 2
(  + 1)(  + 2) = 0. The solutions for 
 are 
 = 0,  = 1,  = 2, and  given that 
 > 0, the possible values of 
 are 
 = 1 and  = 2. Either 1 or 2 
may be gridded as the correct answer. 
QUESTION 17 
The correct answer is 2.
 First, clear the fractions from the given equation 

by multiplying each side of the equation by 36 (the least common 

multiple of 4, 9, and 12). The equation becomes 28
 = 9 + 15. Combining like terms on each side of the equation yields 12
 = 24. Finally, dividing both sides of the equation by 12 yields 
 = 2. _7 _4 _3 _1 _1_5_3_5_8 _2Alternatively, since 
  =  =  and 4 + 12 = 12 + 12 = 12 = 3,9993 
_1_2 _1_2
  = . Multiplying each side of 
 = 33 
33 
by 3 yields 
 = 2. QUESTION 18 
The correct answer is 105.
z = 2y and y = 75, it follows 

z = 150, and so z = 30. Thus, each of the base angles of 
_the isosceles triangle on the right has measure 
= 75°.2 Therefore, the measure of the angle marked 
° i
 so the value of 
 is 105. QUESTION 19 
The correct answer is 370.
 A system of equations can be used where 

h represents the number of calories in a hamburger and 
f represents 
the number of calories in an order of fries. The equation 2
h + 3f = 1700 represents the fact that 2 hamburgers and 3 orders of fries contain a 

total of 1700 calories, and the equation 
h = f + 50 represents the fact 

        
                         
  
   
        
     
               
  
                _ _ _ _ ANSWER EXPLANATIONS

 that one hamburger contains 50 more calories than an order of fries. 
Substituting f + 50 for 
h in 2h + 3f = 1700 gives 2( 
f + 50) + 3f = 1700. This equation can be solved as follows: 
2f + 100 + 3f = 1700 5f + 100 = 1700 5f = 1600 f = 320 The number of calories in an order of fries is 320, so the number of 

calories in a hamburger is 50 more than 320, or 370. 
QUESTION 20 
_The correct answer is  
53 or .6. Triangle 
 is a right triangle with 
_ its right angle at 
B. Thus, 

 is the hypotenuse of right triangle 
, and and BC  are the legs of right triangle 
. By the 
_ Pythagorean theorem, 
 = 202
2 = 
144 = 12. Since triangle 
DEF is similar to triangle 
, with vertex 
F corresponding 
to vertex 
C, the measure of angle 
F equals the measure of 
angle 
C. Thus, sin 
F = sin C. From the side lengths of triangle 
, opposite side 
__ _  _12 _3 _3sin C = = = 
20 = . Therefore, sin 
F = . Either 3/5 or 
hypotenuse 
 55 its decimal equivalent, .6, may be gridded as the correct answer. 
Section 4: Math Test Œ Calculator 
QUESTION 1 
Choice C is correct.
 Marilyn™s distance from her campsite remained the 

same during the time she ate lunch. This is represented by a horizontal 

segment in the graph. The only horizontal segment in the graph starts 

at a time of about 1:10 
P.M. and ends at about 1:40 
P.M. Therefore, 

P.M. Choices A, B, and D are incorrect and may be the result of a 

misinterpretation of the graph. For example, choice B is the time 

Marilyn started her lunch, and choice D is the time Marilyn was at the 

maximum distance from her campsite. 
QUESTION 2 
Choice B is correct.
 Of the 25 people who entered the contest, there 

are 8 females under age 40 and 2 males age 40 or older. Because there 

is no overlap in the categories, the probability that the contest winner 

will be either a female under age 40 or a male age 40 or older is 
_8 _2 _10 25 + 25 = 25. Choice A is incorrect and may be the result of dividing 8 by 2, instead 

 the probability that the contest winner will be either a female under 

                   
  age 40 or a female age 40 or older. Choice D is incorrect and may be 

 probability. 
QUESTION 3 
Choice C is correct.
 Based on the graph, sales increased in the 

 decreased thereafter. 
Choices A, B, and D are incorrect; each of these choices contains 
inaccuracies in describing the general trend of music album sales from 

1997 through 2009. 
QUESTION 4 
Choice C is correct.
 The graph of 
y = f () in the coordinate plane is a 
line that passes through each of the points given in the table. From the 

table, one can see that an increase of 1 unit in 
 results in an increase 
of 3 units in f (); for example, 
f f 
 graph of 
y = f () in the coordinate plane is a line with slope 3. Only 
choice C is a line with slope 3. The 
y-intercept of the line is the value 
of f (0). Since an increase of 1 unit in 
 results in an increase of 3 units 
in f (), it follows that 
f f (0) = 3. Since f 
 f (0) = f 
y-intercept of the graph of 
f ( 
 
f is f () = 3 Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because each equation has the incorrect 

slope of the line (the 
y-intercept in each equation is also incorrect). 
QUESTION 5 
Choice B is correct.
 Since 7 percent of the 562 juniors is 0.07(562) 

and 5 percent of the 602 seniors is 0.05(602), the expression 

0.07(562) + 0.05(602) can be evaluated to determine the total number 

of juniors and seniors inducted into the National Honor Society. Of the 

given choices, 69 is closest to the value of the expression. 
Choice A is incorrect and may be the result of adding the number of 

juniors and seniors and the percentages given and then using the 

expression (0.07 + 0.05)(562 + 602). Choices C and D are incorrect and 

 or only the number of seniors inducted. 
QUESTION 6 
Choice A is correct.
 The sum of the two polynomials is 

(32 + 2 ) + (5
2
 like terms: 
(32
 + 2) + (52

2 + 52 
 
 
 
2

 
      
     
      
        
      
        
                                
  
           
    
                 ANSWER EXPLANATIONS

 Choice B is incorrect and may be the result of a sign error when 

term. Choice C is incorrect and may 


 terms. Choice D is incorrect and may be the result of a combination of 

the errors described in choice B and choice C. 
QUESTION 7 
Choice D is correct.
 To solve the equation for 
, multiply both 
_3 _5sides of the equation by the reciprocal of  
, which is . This gives 
_5_3 _4_5 _20  =  , to  =() () 59.3 35 33 
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect and may be the result of errors in 

arithmetic when simplifying the given equation. 
QUESTION 8 
Choice C is correct.
 In the equation 
y = 0.56 + 27.2, the value of 
 increases by 1 for each year that passes. Each time 
 increases by 1, 
y increases by 0.56 since 0.56 is the slope of the graph of this equation. 

Since y represents the average number of students per classroom in 
the year represented by 
, it follows that, according to the model, the 
estimated increase each year in the average number of students per 

 Choice A is incorrect because the total number of students in the 

school in 2000 is the product of the average number of students 

per classroom and the total number of classrooms, which would 

appropriately be approximated by the 
y-intercept (27.2) times the 
total number of classrooms, which is not given. Choice B is incorrect 

because the average number of students per classroom in 2000 

is given by the 
y-intercept of the graph of the equation, but the 
question is asking for the meaning of the number 0.56, which is the 

slope. Choice D is incorrect because 0.56 represents the estimated 
yearly
 change in the average number of students per classroom. The 

 classroom in 2010 and 2000 is 0.56 times the number of years that 

have passed between 2000 and 2010, that is, 0.56 × 10 = 5.6. 
QUESTION 9 
Choice B is correct.
 Because Nate walks 25 meters in 13.7 seconds, 

and 4 minutes is equal to 240 seconds, the proportion 
25 meters
_ _ meters
 = 
,13.7 sec 240 sec 
Nate 

 _25 _= 240 , because the units of meters per second cancel, 
13.7 and then each side of the equation can be multiplied by 240, 
(240)(25) _giving  
=  Therefore, of the given options, 450 meters 
13.7 is closest to the distance Nate will walk in 4 minutes. 

   
                            Choice A is incorrect and may be the result of setting up the proportion 
_13.7 sec _ meters 
as = 240 sec

 25 meters 
to 150. Choices C and D are incorrect and may be the result of errors in 
calculation. 
QUESTION 10 
Choice D is correct.
 On Mercury, the acceleration due to gravity is 
3.6 m/sec
2. Substituting 3.6 for 
g and 90 for 
 in the formula 
W =  gives 
W
 Choice A is incorrect and may be the result of dividing 90 by 3.6. 

Choice B is incorrect and may be the result of subtracting 3.6 from 

90 and rounding to the nearest whole number. Choice C is incorrect 

because an object with a weight of 101 newtons on Mercury would 

have a mass of about 28 kilograms, not 90 kilograms. 
QUESTION 11 
Choice B is correct.
 On Earth, the acceleration due to gravity is 9.8 m/sec
2. Thus, for an object with a weight of 150 newtons, the formula 
W =  becomes 150 = (9.8), which shows that the mass of an object with a 
weight of 150 newtons on Earth is about 15.3 kilograms. Substituting this 

mass into the formula 
W =  and now using the weight of 170 newtons 

g, which shows that the second planet™s acceleration due 
to gravity is about 11.1 m/sec
2. According to the table, this value for the 
acceleration due to gravity holds on Saturn. 
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect. Using the formula 
W =  and the values for 
g in the table shows that an object with a weight of 
170 newtons on these planets would not have the same mass as an 

object with a weight of 150 newtons on Earth. 
QUESTION 12 
Choice D is correct.
 A zero of a function corresponds to an 
-intercept 
of the graph of the function in the 
-plane. Therefore, the complete 
graph of the function 
f
 
-intercepts, and 
therefore, this is the only one of the given graphs that could be the 

complete graph of 
f in the 
-plane. 
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect. The number of 
-intercepts of each 

 
could be the complete graph of 
f
 QUESTION 13 
Choice D is correct.
 Starting with the original equation, 
ht 2 + vt + k, in order to get 
v
t 2 and k need to be subtracted from each side. This yields 
vt = h + 16t 2k, which when 
   
  
                        
       
      
         
                   __ __ ANSWER EXPLANATIONS

 divided by 
t will give 
v in terms of the other variables. However, the 
h + 16t 2kequation 
v = t is not one of the options, so the right side 

 _ hk 16_ t 2_ hkequation is 
v = t + t v = t + 16t. Choices A, B, and C are incorrect and may be the result of arithmetic 
errors when rewriting the original equation to express 
v in terms of 
h, t, and k. QUESTION 14 
Choice A is correct.
 The hotel charges $0.20 per minute to use the 

meeting-room phone. This per-minute rate can be converted to the 

hourly rate using the conversion 1 hour = 60 minutes, as shown below. 
$0.20 $(0.20 × 60) _ 60 minutes 
__= minute
 × 1 hour hour 
Thus, the hotel charges $(0.20 × 60) per hour to use the meeting-

room phone. Therefore, the cost 
, in dollars, for 
h hours of use is 
 = (0.20 × 60)h, which is equivalent to 
 = 0.20(60h). Choice B is incorrect because in this expression the per-minute rate 

is multiplied by 
h, the number of 
hours
 of phone use. Furthermore, 

 per-minute or per-hour rate. This is not the case. Choice C is incorrect 
_60because the expression indicates that the hotel charges $ 
( ) per0.20 hour for use of the meeting-room phone, not $0.20(60) per hour. 

Choice D is incorrect because the expression indicates that the hourly 
_rate is  
601 times the per-minute rate, not 60 times the per-minute rate. 
QUESTION 15 
Choice A is the correct answer.
 Experimental research is a method 

used to study a small group of people and generalize the results to a 

larger population. However, in order to make a generalization involving 

 
 The participants must be selected at random. 
The participants must be randomly assigned to treatment groups. 
When these conditions are met, the results of the study can be 

 In this study, all conditions are met and the population from which the 

participants were selected are people with poor eyesight. Therefore, a 

 the population of people with poor eyesight. 

                     
       
      
       
           
       
         
     _ _ _ Choice B is incorrect. The study did not include all available 
treatments, so no conclusion can be made about the relative 

 participants were selected at random from a large population of people 

with poor eyesight. Therefore, the results can be generalized only to 

that population and not to anyone in general. Also, the conclusion is 

too strong: an experimental study might show that people are likely to 

be helped by a treatment, but it cannot show that 
anyone
 who takes 
the treatment will be helped. Choice D is incorrect. This conclusion 


likely
 to improve 
the eyesight of people with poor eyesight, but it cannot show that 


will cause improvement in eyesight for every 
person. Furthermore, since the people undergoing the treatment in the 

study were selected from people with poor eyesight, the results can be 

generalized only to this population, not to all people. 
QUESTION 16 
Choice B is correct.
 The graphs of 
y = f () and y = g() are given. In 
order for 
f () + g() to be 0, there must be one or more values of 
 for 
which the 
y-coordinates of the graphs are opposites. Looking at the 
graphs, one can see that this occurs at 

 on the graph of 
f
g. Thus, at 

f () + g(  Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because none of these 
-values 

f () + g() = 0. QUESTION 17 
Choice B is correct.
 The quantity of the product supplied to the 
_market is given by the function 
S() = 21  + 40. If the price 
 of the 
product

 
supplied can be determined by substituting 
 + 10 for 
 in the function 
S() = 12  + 40. This gives 
S( + 10) = 21( + 10) + 40 = 21  + 45, which shows that 
S( + 10) = S() + 5. Therefore, the quantity supplied to 
the market will increase by 5 units when the price of the product is 

increased by $10. 

 in the linear function 
S. This is the slope of the graph of the function, where 
 is on the horizontal 
_axis and S() is on the vertical axis. Since the slope is  
21 , for every 
_increase of 1 in 
, there will be an increase of  
21 in S(), and therefore, 
an increase of 10 in 
 will yield an increase of 5 in 
S(). Choice A is incorrect. If the quantity supplied decreases as the price 

of the product increases, the function 
S() would be decreasing, 
_but S() = 21  + 40 is an increasing function. Choice C is incorrect 
and may be the result of assuming the slope of the graph of 
S() is 
      
                                ANSWER EXPLANATIONS

 equal to 1. Choice D is incorrect and may be the result of confusing the 
y-intercept of the graph of 
S() with the slope, and then adding 10 to 
the 
y-intercept. 
QUESTION 18 
Choice B is correct.
 The quantity of the product supplied to the market 

will equal the quantity of the product demanded by the market if 
S () _is equal to D ( ), that is, if 
21 . Solving this equation 
gives 
 = 120, and so $120 is the price at which the quantity of the 
product supplied will equal the quantity of the product demanded. 
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect. At these dollar amounts, the 

quantities given by 
S () and D () are not equal. 
QUESTION 19 
Choice C is correct.
 It is given that 1 ounce of graphene covers 

 _
13 acres, then 336 football 
_
13 = 448 acres. Therefore, of the 
choices given, 450 acres is closest to the number of acres 48 ounces of 

graphene could cover. 
Choice A is incorrect and may be the result of dividing, instead 
_of multiplying, 

13 . Choice B is incorrect and 

 
 graphene. Choice D is incorrect and may be the result of setting up 
_the expression 
7 × 48 × 4 
3 fraction. 
QUESTION 20 
Choice B is correct.

 graph that represents Michael™s 34-minute swim and then compare the 

 

 that took 34 minutes, look along the vertical line of the graph that 

is marked ﬁ34ﬂ on the horizontal axis. That vertical line intersects 

only one point in the scatterplot, at 148 beats per minute. On the 

 34 minutes at 150 beats per minute. Therefore, for the swim that took 

 

 Choices A, C, and D are incorrect and may be the result of misreading 

the graph. 

                 
     
        
     
     
          
            QUESTION 21 
Choice C is correct.
 Linear growth is characterized by an increase of 
a quantity at a constant rate. Exponential growth is characterized by 

an increase of a quantity at a relative rate; that is, an increase by the 

same factor over equal increments of time. In choice C, the value of 

the account increases by 1% each year; that is, the value is multiplied 

by the same factor, 1.01, each year. Therefore, the value described in 

choice C grows exponentially. 
Choices A and B are incorrect because the rate depends only on 

the initial value, and thus the value increases by the same amount 

each year. Both options A and B describe linear growth. Choice D is 

incorrect; it is is also a description of linear growth, as the increase is 

constant each year. 
QUESTION 22 
Choice B is correct.
 One of the three numbers is 
; let the other 
two numbers be 
y and z. Since the sum of three numbers is 855, the 
equation 
 + y + z = 855 is true. The statement that 
 is 50% more than 
the sum of the other two numbers can be represented as 
 = 1.5(y + z), or  = _32(y + z). Multiplying both sides of the equation 
 = _32(y + z) by  
_2 3 __ _2gives  
23 = y + z. Substituting 23 in  + y + z = 855 gives 
 + 3 = 855, or _5 = 855. Therefore, 
 equals 5_3 × 855 = 513.3 Choices A, C, and D are incorrect and may be the result of 

computational errors. 
QUESTION 23 
Choice C is correct.
 Since the angles are acute and sin(
°) = cos(b°), it follows from the complementary angle property of sines and cosines 

that 
 + b = 90. Substituting 4k
 and 6k
b gives 
(4kkk
 10k = 125, and k = 12.5. Choice A is incorrect and may be the result of mistakenly assuming 

that 
 = b and making a sign error. Choices B and D are incorrect 
because they result in values for 
 and b such that sin(
 b°). QUESTION 24 
Choice D is correct.
 Let  be the number of students in Mr. Kohl™s 
class. The conditions described in the question can be represented by 

the equations 
 + 5 and  + 21 = 4. Substituting 3 + 5 for 
 in the 
second equation gives 3
 + 5 + 21 = 4
 = 26. Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because the values given for the 

 the question. For example, if there were 16 students in the class, then 

 
         
       
       
    
      
    
    
        
                        
           
                              ANSWER EXPLANATIONS

 of solution in the beaker, but the second condition would imply that 

 contradiction shows that there cannot be 16 students in the class. 
QUESTION 25 
Choice D is correct.
 The volume of the grain silo can be found by 
adding the volumes of all the solids of which it is composed. The 

silo is made up of a cylinder with height 10 feet (ft) and base radius 

5 ft and two cones, each having height 5 ft and base radius 5 ft. The 
formulas 
Vcylinder = 
2h and Vcone = _13 
2h can be used to determine 
the total volume of the silo. Since the two cones have identical 
dimensions, the total volume, in cubic feet, of the silo is given by 
_1 _4Vsilo
 = (5)2(10) + (2)( 3 )
(5)2(5) = ( 3 )(250), which is approximately 
equal to 1,047.2 cubic feet. 
Choice A is incorrect because this is the volume of only the two 

cones. Choice B is incorrect because this is the volume of only the 

cylinder. Choice C is incorrect because this is the volume of only one 

of the cones plus the cylinder. 
QUESTION 26 
Choice C is correct.
 The line passes through the origin, (2, 
k), and (k

 line. Since the line passes through (0, 0) and (2, 
k), the slope of the line 
is equal to k_ = _ k 2 . Similarly, since the line passes through (0, 0) 
 _ _32and (k, 32), the slope of the line is equal to  
 = . Since eachk k expression gives the slope of the same line, it must be true that 
_ k _32 _ _32 2= . Multiplying each side of 
k 2=  by 2
k gives 
k2 = 64, from which 
kk it follows that 
k = 8 or k
 could be the value of 
k. Choices A, B, and D are incorrect and may be the result of 

computational errors. 
QUESTION 27 
Choice C is correct.
 Let  and  be the length and width, respectively, 
of the original rectangle. The area of the original rectangle is 
 = . The rectangle is altered by increasing its length by 10 percent 

and decreasing its width by 
 percent; thus, the length of the 
altered rectangle is 1.1
, and the width of the altered rectangle is 
 _ . The alterations decrease the area by 12  
percent, so 
( 100 ) 
  = 0.88. The area 
of the altered rectangle is the product of its length and width, so 
 _0.88 = (1.1)  . Since  = , this last equation can 
( 100 ) 
                          
  
                 
     
      
                        _ _ 
_ _ 
be rewritten as 0.88
 = (1.1)(  ) = (1.1)(  ), from 
100 100 which it follows that 0.88 = (1.1) 
(  ), or 0.8 = (  ).100 100  _Therefore, 
100 = 0.2, and so the value of 
 is 20. Choice A is incorrect and may be the result of confusing the 12 percent 
decrease in area with the percent decrease in width. Choice B is 

incorrect because decreasing the width by 15 percent results in a 
6.5 percent decrease in area, not a 12 percent decrease. Choice D is 
incorrect and may be the result of adding the percents given in the 

question (10 + 12). QUESTION 28 
Choice D is correct.
 For the present population to decrease by 

10 percent, it must be multiplied by the factor 0.9. Since the engineer 

estimates that the population will decrease by 10 percent every 

20 years, the present population, 50,000, must be multiplied by (0.9)
, where 
 is the number of 20-year periods that will have elapsed 
t years from now. After 
t years, the number of 20-year periods that 
_have elapsed is 
_ 20 t . Therefore, 50,000(0.9 
) 20 t represents the engineer™s 
estimate of the population of the city 
t years from now. 
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because each of these choices either 

confuses the percent decrease with the multiplicative factor that 

represents the percent decrease or mistakenly multiplies 
t
 the number of 20-year periods that will have elapsed in 
t years. 
QUESTION 29 
Choice A is correct.
 Let  be the number of left-handed female 
students and let 
y be the number of left-handed male students. Then 
the number of right-handed female students will be 5
 and the number 
of right-handed male students will be 9
y. Since the total number of left-
handed students is 18 and the total number of right-handed students is 

  + y = 18{5 + 9y = 122 Solving this system gives 
 = 10 and y = 8. Thus, 50 of the 122 right-
handed students are female. Therefore, the probability that a right
-_handed student selected at random is female is  
50 122 , which to the 
nearest thousandth is 0.410. 
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect and may be the result of incorrectly 

calculating the missing values in the table. 

                    
       
                                        
_ _ 
_ _ ANSWER EXPLANATIONS

 QUESTION 30 
Choice A is correct.
 Subtracting the sides of 3
y +  = 5y
 from the corresponding sides of 3
 + b = 5
 (3y) + (b) = (5y b12, or b1 2, _it follows that (3
y) + ( 12 ) = (5y). Solving this equation for 
 in terms of 
y gives 
 = y41. Therefore, 
 is y minus 
1 4. Choices B, C, and D are incorrect and may be the result of making a 
computational error when solving the equations for 
 in terms of 
y. QUESTION 31 
The correct answer is either 4 or 5.
 Because each student ticket 

costs $2 and each adult ticket costs $3, the total amount, in dollars, 

that Chris spends on 
 student tickets and 1 adult ticket is 2(
) + 3(1). Because Chris spends at least $11 but no more than $14 on the tickets, 

one can write the compound inequality 2
 + 3  11 and 2
 Subtracting 3 from each side of both inequalities and then dividing 

each side of both inequalities by 2 yields 
 4 and 
 value of 
 must be an integer that is both greater than or equal to 4 and 
less than or equal to 5.5. Therefore, 
 = 4 or  = 5. Either 4 or 5 may be 
gridded as the correct answer. 
QUESTION 32 
The correct answer is 58.6.
 The mean of a data set is determined by 

calculating the sum of the values and dividing by the number of values 

in the data set. The sum of the ages, in years, in the data set is 703, 

and the number of values in the data set is 12. Thus, the mean of the 

 _of their terms is 
703 12 . The question asks for an answer rounded to the 
nearest tenth, so the decimal equivalent, rounded to the nearest tenth, 

is the correct answer. This rounded decimal equivalent is 58.6. 
QUESTION 33 
The correct answer is 9.

2 + 5
 2(2
2 +  + 
 by using the distributive property and combining like terms as follows: 
  2 + 5 2   2 2) + (5    2 + 9 + 0  is the value of 
b, which is 9. Alternatively, since 
b

 2 + 52
-term in the 

-term is 5
) = 5 + 4 = 9, so the value of 
b is 9. 
   
          
  
            
        
                         QUESTION 34 
_The correct answer is 
5 or .625. A complete rotation around 
8 a point is 360° or 2 radians. Since the central angle 

 has _5 _5 _4 _5measure  
 radians, it represents  
= 8 of a complete rotation around 
42 point O. Therefore, the sector formed by central angle 

 has area 
_equal to 58 the area of the entire circle. Either the fraction 5/8 or its 
decimal equivalent, .625, may be gridded as the correct answer. 
QUESTION 35 
The correct answer is 50.
 The mean of a data set is the sum of the 
values in the data set divided by the number of values in the data set. 


 

 
 

 

 
rating is 100, so the maximum possible value of the sum of the 12th 

through 20th ratings is 9 × 100 = 900. Therefore, for the store to be 

 

 QUESTION 36 
The correct answer is 750.
 The inequalities y + 3000 and y
-plane. They are represented by the 
lower half-planes with the boundary lines 
y + 3000 and y = 5, respectively. The solution set of the system of inequalities will be the 

intersection of these half-planes, including the boundary lines, and the 

solution (, b) with the greatest possible value of 
b will be the point 
of intersection of the boundary lines. The intersection of boundary 

lines of these inequalities can be found by substituting 5
 for 
y in 
 + 3000, which has solution  = 150. Thus, the 
coordinate of the point of intersection is 150. 
Therefore, the 
y-coordinate of the point of intersection of the boundary 

 
value of 
b for a point (, b) that is in the solution set of the system of 
inequalities. 
QUESTION 37 
The correct answer is 7.
 The average number of shoppers, 
N, in the checkout line at any time is 
N = , where 
 is the number of 
shoppers entering the checkout line per minute and 
 is the average 
number of minutes each shopper spends in the checkout line. Since 

84 shoppers per hour make a purchase, 84 shoppers per hour enter 

the checkout line. This needs to be converted to the number of 

   
  
  
                 __ ANSWER EXPLANATIONS

 shoppers per minute. Since there are 60 minutes in one hour, the rate 
84 shoppers 
is  = 1.4 shoppers per minute. Using the given formula 
60 minutes 
with 
 = 1.4 and t = 5 yields 
N =  = (1.4)(5) = 7. Therefore, the average 
number of shoppers, 
N, in the checkout line at any time during 
business hours is 7. 
QUESTION 38 
The correct answer is 60.
 The estimated average number of 
shoppers in the original store at any time is 45. In the new store, 

the manager estimates that an average of 90 shoppers per 
hour enter the store, which is equivalent to 1.5 shoppers per minute. The 

manager also estimates that each shopper stays in the store for an 

average of 12 minutes. Thus, by Little™s law, there are, on average, 
N =  = (1.5)(12) = 18 shoppers in the new store at any time. This 
_is  × 100 = 60 percent less than the average number of shoppers 
45 in the original store at any time. 

152982 COLLEGE BD sat study 2017_Text Sig 17                                     ]
152982 COLLEGE BD sat study 2017_Text Signature 17 Side B Yellow152982 COLLEGE BD sat study 2017_Text Signature 17 Side B Magenta152982 COLLEGE BD sat study 2017_Text Signature 17 Side B Cyan152982 COLLEGE BD sat study 2017_Text Signature 17 Side B Black                                    ] - 8.25 x10.875 - 3/16 HT -3/16 Spine -  48 page on 46x51.875
17171700374-091 SAT 2016-17 PTR 3.indd   6363/11/17   5:35 AMtmp-1361953365.old.job
